=== PAGE 1 ===



=== PAGE 2 ===

Government of Nepal
Ministry of Education, Science and Technology
Curriculum Development Centre
Sanothimi, Bhaktapur
English
(Grade 11)


=== PAGE 3 ===

Publisher:
Government of Nepal
Ministry of Education, Science and Technology 
Curriculum Development Centre 
Sanothimi, Bhaktapur
© Publisher
Edition:
2077 BS (2020 AD)
Printing:

=== PAGE 4 ===

Preface
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF) advocates for the promo tion of skill-
oriented, life skill-based, employment-driven and value-based s chool education. 
It envisions developing the human capital dedicated to nation, nationality, national 
integrity and Nepali specialty. English textbook for grade 11 h as been prepared 
following the spirit of NCF 2076 and Secondary Level Curriculum  2076 (Grade 11 
and Grade12). An attempt has also been made to incorporate the emerging needs of 
learners. The book includes the contents to develop all four language skills blended in 
the tasks and activities with contextual grammar and related vocabulary. 
The book has two sections: language development and literature.  The language 
development section includes a range of contemporary issue-base d local and global 
thematic texts intended to develop intensive reading skills and  foster competence in 
grammar, vocabulary, speech and writing of different types. The  literature section 
includes genre-based literary texts for both intensive and exte nsive reading so as to 
enable the learners to discern different aspects of the literary texts and practise creative 
writing. Each text is followed by adequate exercises to foster creativity and critical 
interpretation in the learners along with interactive skills an d sensitivity about the 
culture and tradition. 
This textbook was written by Mohan Singh Saud and edited by Prof. Dr. Bal Mukunda 
Bhandari, Dr. Ganga Ram Gautam, Dr. Gopal Prasad Pandey and Pro f. Dr. Jiba Lal 
Sapkota. Director General Keshab Prasad Dahal, Dr. Lekh Nath Po udel and Director 
Tuka Raj Adhikari also contributed in shaping the book in this form. Several experts 
and practitioners that include; Nim Prakash Singh Rathaur, Shan kar Adhikari, Nabin 
Kumar Khadka, Matrika Subedi, Ramesh Dhakal, Passhupati Pandey and Ananda 
Dhungana contributed to the revision and development of the tasks particularly in the 
language development section. Similarly, Gangadhar Hada, Rani J ha, Purna Bahadur 
Lamichhane, Mahendra Kumar Shrestha, Hari Prasad Kafle, Hari Pr asad Dhakal, 
Dipendra Regmi and Tanka Nath Acharya provided suggestions and feedback. The 
Illustration of the book was done by Dev Koimee and the layout was designed by 
Khados Sunuwar. The Curriculum Development Centre (CDC) extends sincere thanks 
to all of them. The centre would like to acknowledge all the so urces from where the 
texts, audios and tasks are borrowed and adapted. 
The centre always welcomes constructive feedback for the betterment of its publications.
2020 Curriculum Development Centre
 Sanothimi, Bhaktapur

=== PAGE 5 ===

Table of Contents
Section I: Language Development
Unit Reading Vocabulary Writing Grammar Listening Speaking
(Function) Project Work Page
1. Education and 
Humanity
Education First Dictionary 
use Alphabet-
ical order
Personal narra-
tives
Word classes Conversation Expressing 
good wishes
Contracted 
forms of verbs
Poster presen-
tation
3
2. Communication Freewriting Position of 
adverbs
Paragraph 
writing
Position of 
adverbs
Conversation Expressing 
agreement/
disagreement
Hobby Cards 13
3. Media and 
Society
Social Media: 
Its Infl uence 
and Control 
over People’s 
Lives
Prepositional 
verbs
Paragraph 
writing
Prepositions 
of direction
Television Pro-
gramme
Giving di-
rections and 
instructions
Facebook 
survey
22
4. History and 
Culture
Qin Dynasty Stress
Limericks
Email
Table interpre-
tation
Past simple Documentary Narrating 
events
Comparative 
chart
31
5.
 Life and Love Th e Looking 
Glass
Word forma-
tion
Paragraph Will and be 
going to
Conversation Expressing deci-
sions, intentions 
and plans
Drawing a 
picture and 
presentation
42
6. Health and 
Exercise
Y ou may 
scoff …
Suffi  xes
Silent 
Essay
Instruction 
Subject-verb 
agreement
Conversation Describing 
places
Mini research 53
7. Ecology and 
Development
Foresters with-
out Diplomas
Prefi xes Personal letters
Essay
Transitive, 
intransitive 
and linking 
verbs
Interview Asking about 
opinions/giving 
opinions
Speech 62
8. Humour and 
Satire
A Few Kind 
Words for 
Superstition
Derivation
Collocation 
with verbs
Argumentative 
essay
Present sim-
ple  present 
continuous
Conversation Suggesting and 
advising 
Interviewing 71

=== PAGE 6 ===

Unit Reading Vocabulary Writing Grammar Listening Speaking
(Function) Project Work Page
9. Democracy and 
Human Rights
Nelson Man-
dela's 1994 
Inauguration 
Speech
Pronuncia-
tion of -d/ed 
and     -s/es
Short biogra-
phy
Speech
Should,  had 
better
Conversation Persuading Collecting 
and present-
ing informa-
tion
79
10. Home Life 
and Family 
Relationship
Th e Tattered 
Blanket
Spelling
Syllable
Writing a diary Connectives Conversation Expressing 
reactions
Newspaper
Article
88
11. Arts and Creation Why is the 
Renaissance 
Important?
Idioms and 
phrasal verbs
Essay Relative 
clause (who/
that/which)
Th e Talk Show Describing 
people
Making a 
profi le
99
12. Fantasy Down the Rab-
bit Hole
Consonants 
/s/ and//, /s/ 
and /z/
Narrating 
events
Wish Speech Expressing 
regrets
Book review 109
13. Career and 
Entrepreneurship
Mahabir Pun: 
A visionary 
social entrepre-
neur
Irregular 
plurals
Email 
Communique
Present per-
fect 
Past simple
Speech Narrating 
experience and 
achievements
Interviewing 
and writing 
short biogra-
phy
118
14. Power and 
Politics
Napoleon 
Bonaparte
Compound 
noun phrases
Paragraph
Essay
May, might, 
must, can’t
Speech Expressing 
certainty and 
probability
Description 
of a person
130
15. War and Peace Shall there Be 
Peace?
Essay Sentence 
functions
Conversation Encouraging/
discouraging
Picture story 137
16. Critical Th inking What is the 
Soul?
Critical writing Used to Narration Comparing past 
and present 
habits 
Writing sum-
mary
145
17.
 Globalisation and 
Diaspora
What Lost 
Identity?: Th e 
Diaspora and 
Globalisation 
Collocation News story Infi  nitive and 
gerund
Documentary Expressing 
obligations
Newspaper 
article
152

=== PAGE 7 ===

Unit Reading Vocabulary Writing Grammar Listening Speaking
(Function) Project Work Page
18. Immigration and 
Identity
Identity Crisis 
in Immigrants  
(book review)
Homophones Book/fi lm 
review
Reported 
speech
Film review Reporting Report writ-
ing
162
19. Travel and 
Tourism
Discovering 
West Nepal 
– the Wild 
Frontier
sk, sp, st 
clusters
Travelogue
Essay
Voice Documentary Expressing 
compliment
Preparing 
brochure
172
20. Science and 
Technology
Taking my 
Son to Col-
lege, where 
Technology 
has Replaced 
Serendipity
Commonly 
confusing 
words
Interpreting pa-
ra-orthographic 
texts
Articles Documentary Requesting and 
off ering
Oratory 
contest
181

=== PAGE 8 ===

Section II : Literature
Unit 1 Short Stories
1. The Selfish Giant  by Oscar Wilde 193
2. The Oval Portrait by Edgar Allan Poe  200
3. God Sees the Truth but Waits  by Leo Tolstoy 206
4. The Wish by Roald Dahl 215
5. Civil Peace  by Chinua Achebe 220
6. Two Little Soldiers by Guy de Maupassant 227
7. An Astrologer’s Day by R. K.  Narayan 235
Unit 2 Poems
1. Corona Says by Vishnu S. Rai 241
2. A Red, Red Rose by Robert Burns 245
3. All the World's a Stage  by William Shakespeare 248
4. Who are you, little i? by E. E. Cummings 251
5. The Gift in Wartime by Tran Mong Tu 253
Unit 3 Essays 
1. Sharing Tradition by Frank LaPena 256
2. How to Live Before You Die by Steve Jobs 261
3. What I Require from Life by J.B.S. Haldane 268
4. What is Poverty?  by Jo Goodwin Parker 274
5. Scientific Research is a Token of Humankind’s Survival
 by Vladimir Keilis-Borok 280
Unit 4 One Act Plays 
1. Trifles by Susan Glaspell 285
2. A Sunny Morning  by Serafin and Foaquin Alvarez Quintero 302
3. Refund  by Fritz Karinthy 316

=== PAGE 9 ===

Section One
Language Development

=== PAGE 10 ===

English: Grade 11 3
Unit 1 Education and Humanity
“The roots of education are bitter, but the fruit is sweet.” - Aristotle
Reading
Education First
 Before you read  
a. Who are these people? 
b. What are they known for? How did education contribute to the ir success in life? 
Discuss with a partner.
c. What do you think the text is about? 
Now read the speech by Malala delivered at the United Nations Youth Assembly 
on 12 July 2013.
Today, it is an honour for me to be speaking again after a long  time. Being here with 
such honourable people is a great moment in my life.I don't kno w where to begin my 
speech. I don't know what people would be expecting me to say. But first of all, thank 
you to God for whom we are all equal and thank you to every 
person who has prayed for my fast recovery and a new life. 
I cannot believe how much love people have shown me. I 
have received thousands of good wish cards and gifts from 
all over the world. Thank you to all of them. Thank you to the 
children whose innocent words encouraged me. Thank you 
to my elders whose prayers strengthened me. I would like to 
Malala in her childhood

=== PAGE 11 ===

 English: Grade 11 4
thank my nurses, doctors and all of the staff of the hospitals in Pakistan and the UK 
and the UAE governments who have helped me get better and recover my strength. 
I fully support Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the Secretary-General in his Global Education First 
Initiative and the work of the UN Special Envoy Mr. Gordon Brow n. And I thank 
them both for the leadership they continue to give. They contin ue to inspire all of us 
to action.
There are hundreds of human rights activists and social workers , who are not only 
speaking for human rights, but who are struggling to achieve their goals of education, 
peace and equality. Thousands of people have been killed by the terrorists and millions 
have been injured. I am just one of them.
So here I stand, one girl among many.
I speak not for myself, but for all girls and boys.
I raise up my voice – not so that I can shout, but so that thos e without a voice can be 
heard.
Those who have fought for their rights:
Their right to live in peace.
Their right to be treated with dignity.
Their right to equality of opportunity.
Their right to be educated.
On the 9
th of October 2012, the Taliban shot me on the left side of my forehead. They 
shot my friends too. They thought that the bullets would silenc e us. But they failed. 
And then, out of that silence came, thousands of voices. The terrorists thought that they 
would change our aims and stop our ambitions but nothing changed in my life except 
this: weakness, fear and hopelessness died. Strength, power and  courage was born. I 
am the same Malala. My ambitions are the same. My hopes are the same. My dreams 
are the same.
I am not against anyone. Neither am I here to speak in terms of  personal revenge 
against the Taliban or any other terrorists group. I am here to  speak up for the right 
of education of every child. I want education for the sons and the daughters of all the 
extremists especially the Taliban.
I do not even hate the Talib who shot me. Even if there is a gu n in my hand and he 
stands in front of me, I would not shoot him. This is the compassion that I have learnt 
Malala delivering a speech in UN 
General Assembly

=== PAGE 12 ===

English: Grade 11 5
from Muhammad-the prophet of mercy, Jesus Christ and Lord Buddh a. This is the 
legacy of change that I have inherited from Martin Luther King, Nelson Mandela and 
Muhammad Ali Jinnah. This is the philosophy of non-violence that I have learnt from 
Gandhi Jee, Bacha Khan and Mother Teresa. And this is the forgi veness that I have 
learnt from my mother and father. This is what my soul is telling me, be peaceful and 
love everyone.
We realise the importance of light when we see darkness. We realise the importance of 
our voice when we are silenced. In the same way, when we were in Swat, the north of 
Pakistan, we realised the importance of pens and books when we saw the guns.
The wise saying, “The pen is mightier than sword” was true. The extremists are afraid 
of books and pens. The power of education frightens them. They are afraid of women. 
The power of the voice of women frightens them. And that is why  they killed 14 
innocent medical students in the recent attack in Quetta. And t hat is why they killed 
many female teachers and polio workers in Khyber Pukhtoon Khwa and FATA. That 
is why they are blasting schools every day. Because they were a nd they are afraid of 
change, afraid of the equality that we will bring into our society.
I remember that there was a boy in our school who was asked by a journalist, “Why are 
the Taliban against education?” He answered very simply. By pointing to his book he 
said, “A Talib doesn't know what is written inside this book.” They think that God is 
a tiny, little conservative being who would send girls to the hell just because of going 
to school. The terrorists are misusing the name of Islam and Pa shtun society for their 
own personal benefits. Pakistan is peace-loving democratic coun try. Pashtuns want 
education for their daughters and sons. And Islam is a religion of peace, humanity and 
brotherhood. Islam says that it is not only each child's right to get education, rather it 
is their duty and responsibility.
Peace is necessary for education. In many parts of the world wa rs and conflicts stop 
children to go to their schools. We are really tired of these wars. Women and children 
are suffering in many parts of the world in many ways. Young girls have to do domestic 
child labour and are forced to get married at early age. Povert y, ignorance, injustice, 
racism and the deprivation of basic rights are the main problem s faced by both men 
and women.
Today I am focusing on women's rights and girls' education because they are suffering 
the most. There was a time when women social activists asked me n to stand up for 
their rights. But, this time, we will do it by ourselves. I am not telling men to step away 

=== PAGE 13 ===

 English: Grade 11 6
from speaking for women's rights rather I am focusing on women to be independent to 
fight for themselves.
Now it's time to speak up.
So today, we call upon the world leaders to change their strategic policies in favour of 
peace and prosperity.
We call upon the world leaders that all the peace deals must pr otect women and 
children's rights. A deal that goes against the dignity of wome n and their rights is 
unacceptable.
We call upon all governments to ensure free compulsory education for every child all 
over the world.
We call upon all governments to fight against terrorism and violence, to protect children 
from brutality and harm.
We call upon the developed nations to support the expansion of educational opportunities 
for girls in the developing world.
We call upon all communities to be tolerant – to reject prejudice based on cast, creed, 
sect, religion or gender. To ensure freedom and equality for wo men so that they can 
flourish, we cannot all succeed when half of us are held back.
We call upon our sisters around the world to be brave – to embrace the strength within 
themselves and realise their full potential.
We want schools and education for every child's bright future. We will continue our 
journey to our destination of peace and education for everyone. No one can stop us. We 
will speak for our rights and we will bring change through our voice. We must believe 
in the power and the strength of our words. Our words can change the world.
Because we are all together, united for the cause of education.  And if we want to 
achieve our goal, then let us empower ourselves with the weapon of knowledge and let 
us shield ourselves with unity and togetherness.
We must not forget that millions of people are suffering from p overty, injustice and 
ignorance. We must not forget that millions of children are out of schools. We must not 
forget that our sisters and brothers are waiting for a bright peaceful future.
So let us wage a global struggle against illiteracy, poverty and terrorism and let us pick 

=== PAGE 14 ===

English: Grade 11 7
up our books and pens. They are our most powerful weapons.
One child, one teacher, one pen and one book can change the world.
Education is the only solution. Education first.
MalalaYousafzai
 Ways with words 
A. Find the words from the text which mean the following.
a. a messenger or representative, especially one on a diplomati c mission
b. the state or quality of being worthy of honor or respect
c. harm done to someone in response to harm
d. a person who holds extreme views in political or religious m atters
e. sympathetic pity and concern for the sufferings or misfortun es of others
f. a person who is believed to speak for God  
g. the study of the nature of knowledge, reality and existence
h. the use of physical force so as to injure, abuse, damage or destroy
i. an unreasonable dislike of a particular group of people or t hings 
B. Match the words on the left with their opposite meanings on the right.
a. honour i.  kindness
b. innocent ii.  literacy
c. brutality iii.  guilty
d. forgiveness iv.  disgrace
e. illiteracy v.  punishment
C. Using dictionary 
Dictionary contains at least three forms of information about a  word: pronunciation, 
word class and meaning. 
Look at the following dictionary entry of the words ‘humanity’ and ‘humanize’ (Oxford 
Advanced Learner’ s Dictionary 9th edition):
humanity/hjuːˈmænəti/ noun1 [U] people in general: He was found guilty of crimes against 
humanity. 2 [U] the state of being a person rather than a god, an animal or a machine: The story 
was used to emphasize the humanity of Jesus. united by a sense of common humanity 3 [U] the 
quality of being kind to people and animals by making sure that  they do not suffer more than is 
necessary; the quality of being humane: The judge was praised for his courage and humanity. 
OPP inhumanity 4(the) humanities [pl.] the subjects of study that are about the way people 

=== PAGE 15 ===

 English: Grade 11 8
think and behave, for example literature, language, history and philosophy: The college offers a 
wide range of courses in the arts and humanities.
humanize(BrE also -ise) /ˈhjuːmənaɪz/ verb~sth to make sth more pleasant or suitable for people; 
to make sth more HUMANE: These measures are intended to humanize the prison system.
a. Study the dictionary entry above and answer these questions.
i. What is the headword in the first entry?
ii. How many meanings of the word ‘humanity’ are given?
iii. What do the abbreviations U, OPP, pl, and sth stand for?
iv. What is the British English spelling of ‘humanize’?
v. How is the word ‘humanize’ pronounced?
vi. If we say Every person should have the sense of humanity, which meaning 
of ‘humanity’ is applied?
b. Arrange the following words in alphabetical order.
i. advance    analysis    amuse  assure  allergy  attain  aid    anxiety  acute  agreement
ii. smoke small  smart  speaking  smelling  smoothly  smuggler smashed 
smearing smallpox
iii. terminal  terminate  terminology  termite  terms terrace  terrible terribly 
territory terror
c. Make a list of five new words from the reading text. Using a  dictionary, 
write their meanings and use the words in sentences of your own. 
 Comprehension 
Answer the following questions.
a. Why did the speaker receive thousands of good-wishes cards a nd gifts from all 
over the world?
b. According to the speaker, what are hundreds of human rights activists and social 
workers struggling for?
c. What  has she learnt from Gandhi?
d. In what sense is peace necessary for education?
e. According to the speaker, what are the main problems faced b y both men and 
women?
f. What is Malala calling upon all governments?
g. What is the main message of this speech?

=== PAGE 16 ===

English: Grade 11 9
Critical thinking
a. All children have the right to quality education. How can we  ensure this right to 
every child? Discuss the role of the government and the parents to make sure that 
every child can attend school. 
b. Do you think that there is still discrimination between sons  and daughters in 
terms of providing education in our country? What strategies do  you suggest to 
overcome such discrimination against girls? 
c. A Chinese philosopher Confucius said, “If your plan is for o ne year, plant rice; 
if your plan is for ten years, plant trees; if your plan is for  one hundred years, 
educate children.” What is the meaning of this saying? Elaborat e this with 
examples.
Writing
a. Recall your school days. Write in three paragraphs of an eve nt that you always 
remember.
b. "Education empowers a person". Elaborate this statement givi ng examples of 
your personal experience. 
Grammar
 Word classes 
A. Word class refers to the category of words of similar form o r function. 
Another name of word class is a parts of speech. In the text be low, 
certain words are underlined. While you read, try to identify w hich 
word class they belong to. 
Most governments around the world have temporarily closed educa tional institutions 
in an attempt to contain the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. T hese nationwide 
closures are impacting over 60% of the world’s student populati on. Some 1 billion 
students and youth across the planet are affected by school and  university closures 
due to the COVID-19 outbreak. Several other countries have impl emented localized 
closures impacting millions of additional learners. UNESCO is s upporting countries 
in their efforts to mitigate the immediate impact of school clo sures, particularly for 
more vulnerable and disadvantaged communities, and to facilitat e the continuity of 
education for all through remote learning.

=== PAGE 17 ===

 English: Grade 11 10
The Global Education Coalition launched by UNESCO seeks to faci litate inclusive 
learning opportunities for children and youth during this perio d of sudden and 
unprecedented educational disruption. Investment in remote lear ning should both 
mitigate the immediate disruption caused by COVID-19 and establ ish approaches to 
develop more open and flexible education systems for the future.  The Global Coalition 
members and prospective members are encouraged to pledge for th e protection of 
learners’ personal information, privacy and security. 
In the text, the underlined words belong to different word classes or parts of speech.
governments - noun
temporarily - adverb
affected - verb
and - conjunction
in - preposition
immediate - adjective
the - determiner
B. Classify the underlined words into different word classes.
a. The man who is wearing glasses is my uncle’s friend.
b. I bought a round table in the supermarket.
c. Alas, she is dead.
d. Hari works very hard all the time but his wife is very lazy.
e. I have never been to Japan.
C. Read a paragraph of an English newspaper and make a list of about 
20 words. Categorize them into different ‘Word classes’. You can refer 
to the grammar book for help. 
Listening
A. What is your major optional subject in Grade 11?  Why are yo u 
interested in the subject that you have chosen? 
B. Listen to the recording and mark if the sentences are True o r False.
a. The man has already chosen his major subject.
b. The woman is a senior college student. 
c. The woman didn't work during the school year. 
d. The man is attending English class right now.

=== PAGE 18 ===

English: Grade 11 11
C. Listen to the recording and answer the following questions. 
a. Where is the conversation most likely taking place?
b. How many credits does the woman have to take for graduation?  
c. Why has the woman not been able to work in the past year?
d. How does the woman know the man's teacher? 
D. Most students have difficulty in deciding what to study after h igh 
school. Did you also have that problem?  Work in a group of three and 
share the dilemma you had and how you decided to study the subject 
that you have chosen.
Speaking
Expressing good wishes
We use certain pattern to express good wishes. 
A. Read this conversation. Notice the expressions used to expre ss good wishes 
and underline them. 
Ali: Hello Anju, are you coming 
to Rita’s house tonight?
Anju: No, I’m afraid. I can’t.
Ali: Why? Don’t you want to join 
us at the birthday party?
Anju: Of course, I would love to. 
But I have a speech contest 
tomorrow. I have to prepare 
for that.
Ali: Ok, I understand! I wish you 
all the best.
Anju: Thanks.
Ali: You’re welcome, Anju.
Pasang: Hello Lhakpa, I didn’t see you in 
school yesterday.
Lhakpa: That’s because I didn’t come.
Pasang: Really? Why?
Lhakpa: I was sick. I had a fever and my father 
took me to hospital to check whether I 
had dengue fever or not.
Pasang: I am sorry to hear that. And then? It’s 
negative, isn’t it?
Lhakpa: Yes, but I still have cough.
Pasang: I wish you a quick recovery. Get well 
soon.
Lhakpa: Thank you. I hope so.
B. Work in pairs. Write how you would express good wishes in th ese situations.
a. Your sister is taking an IELTS test.
b. One of your friends is attending a job interview and you mee t him/her in 
the street.

=== PAGE 19 ===

 English: Grade 11 12
c. It’s your friend’s birthday.
d. Your friend is leaving for a holiday abroad and you met her at the airport.
C. Contracted forms of verbs
a. Study the following contracted forms of verbs.
’m = am
’s = is or has
’re = are
’ve = have
’ll = will
’d = had or would
I’m
I’ve
I’ll
I’d
he’s
he’ll
he’d
she’s
she’ll
she’d
it’s
we’re
we’ve
we’ll
we’d
you’re
you’ve
you’ll
you’d
they’re
they’ve
they’ll
they’d
D. Say the contracted forms and the full forms of the verbs cor rectly. Notice 
that full forms have weak forms of pronunciation.
I'm /aɪm/ feeling tired. I am /aɪ əm/feeling tired.
He's /hiz/ watching TV . He is /hi ɪz/watching TV .
It’s /ɪts/ ready now. It is /ɪt ɪz/ready now.
She's lost the key. She has lost the key.
Janak's gone out. Janak  has gone out.
We're working hard. We are working hard.
I've composed a song. I have composed a song.
They'll come soon. They will come soon.
I'd like to have a cup of tea. I would like to have a cup of tea.
Who's your favourite singer? Who is your favourite singer?
Note that contracted forms of verbs are common in spoken English, bu t in written 
English, it’s informal to write contracted forms.
Project Work
Visit a woman who is famous in your community. Ask her questions how she was able 
to attend school and the struggle she made for education.  Prep are a poster of her life 
story and present it in class.

=== PAGE 20 ===

English: Grade 11 13
Unit 2 Communication
“Good writing does not succeed or fail on the strength of its a bility to persuade. It 
succeeds or fails on the strength of its ability to engage you, to make you think, to give 
you a glimpse into someone else’s head.” – Malcolm Gladwell
Reading
Freewriting
 Before you read 
a. What do the following images indicate? What comes to your mi nd when you see 
them? What do they communicate to people? 
b. What do the following quotes mean? 
i. If writing is easy, you are doing it wrong.
ii. The pen is the tongue of the mind.
Now read the following essay about freewriting as another way t o brainstorm a 
general topic in order to arrive at a specific focus in writing.
The most effective way I know to improve your writing is to do freewriting exercises 
regularly. At least three times a week. They are sometimes called “automatic writing,” 
“babbling,” or “jabbering” exercises. The idea is simply to write for ten minutes (later 
on, perhaps fifteen or twenty). Don’t stop for anything. Go qui ckly without rushing. 
Never stop to look back, to cross something out, to wonder how to spell something, to 
wonder what word or thought to use, or to think about what you are doing. If you can’t 
think of a word or a spelling, just use a squiggle or else write, “I can’t think of it.” Just 
put down something. The easiest thing is just to put down whate ver is in your mind. 
If you get stuck it’s fine to write “I can’t think what to say,  I can’t think what to say” 

=== PAGE 21 ===

 English: Grade 11 14
as many times as you want; or repeat the last word you wrote ov er and over again; or 
anything else. The only requirement is that you never stop.
Freewriting exercise is important. It must be a piece of writing which, even if someone 
reads it, doesn’t send any ripples back to you. It is like writing something and putting it 
in a bottle in the sea. The teacher less class helps your writing by providing maximum 
feedback. Freewriting helps you by providing no feedback at all . When I assign one, 
I invite the writer to let me read it. But also tell him to kee p it if he prefers. I read it 
quickly and make no comments at all and I do not speak with him  about it. The main 
thing is that a freewriting must never be evaluated in any way;  in fact, there must be 
no discussion or comment at all.
Here is an example of a fairly coherent exercise (sometimes they are very incoherent, 
which is fine):
I think I’ll write what’s on my mind, but the only thing on my mind right now is what to write 
for ten minutes. I’ve never done this before and I’m not prepared in any way—the sky is cloudy 
today, how’s that? Now I’m afraid I won’t be able to think of what to write when I get to the end 
of the sentence— well, here I am at the end of the sentence—here I am again, again, again, again, 
at least I’m still writing—Now I ask is there some reason to be  happy that I’m still writing—ah 
yes! Here comes the question again—What am I getting out of thi s? What point is there in it? 
It’s almost obscene to always ask it but I seem to question everything that way and I was gonna 
say something else pertaining to that but I got so busy writing  down the first part that I forgot 
what I was leading into. This is kind of fun oh don’t stop writ ing—cars and trucks speeding by 
somewhere out the window, pens clittering across peoples’ paper s. The sky is still cloudy—is 
it symbolic that I should be mentioning it? Huh? I dunno. Maybe  I should try colors, blue, 
red, dirty words—wait a minute—no can’t do that, orange, yellow , arm tired, green pink violet 
magenta lavender red brown black green—now that I can’t think o f any more colours—just 
about done—relief? Maybe.
Freewriting may seem crazy but actually it makes simple sense. Think of the difference 
between speaking and writing. Writing has the advantage of perm itting more editing. 
But that’s its downfall too. Almost everybody interposes a mass ive and complicated 
series of editing between the time words start to be born into consciousness and when 
they finally come off the end of the pencil or typewriter onto the page. This is partly 
because schooling makes us obsessed with the “mistakes” we make  in writing. Many 
people are constantly thinking about spelling and grammar as th ey try to write. I am 
always thinking about the awkwardness, wordiness, and general m ushiness of my 
natural verbal product as I try to write down words.
But it’s not just “mistakes” or “bad writing” we edit as we wri te. We also edit 
unacceptable thoughts and feelings, as we do in speaking. In wr iting there is more 

=== PAGE 22 ===

English: Grade 11 15
time to do it so the editing is heavier: when speaking, there’s  someone right there 
waiting for a reply and he’ll get bored or think we’re crazy if we don’t come out with 
something. Most of the time in speaking, we settle for the catc h-as-catch-can way in 
which the words tumble out. In writing, however, there’s a chan ce to try to get them 
right. But the opportunity to get them right is a terrible burd en: you can work for two 
hours trying to get a paragraph “right” and discover it’s not right at all. And then give 
up.
Editing, in itself, is not the problem. Editing is usually nece ssary if we want to end 
up with something satisfactory. The problem is that editing goe s on at the same time 
as producing. The editor is, as it were, constantly looking ove r the shoulder of the 
producer and constantly fiddling with what he’s doing while he’ s in the middle of 
trying to do it. No wonder the producer gets nervous, jumpy, in hibited, and finally 
can’t be coherent. It’s an unnecessary burden to try to think of words and also worry at 
the same time whether they’re the right words.
The main thing about freewriting is that it is none-editing. It is an exercise in bringing 
together the process of producing words and putting them down on the page. Practiced 
regularly, it undoes the ingrained habit of editing at the same  time you are trying to 
produce. It will make writing less blocked because words will come more easily. You 
will use up more paper, but chew up fewer pencils.
Next time you write; notice how often you stop yourself from writing down something 
you were going to write down. Or else cross it out after it’s w ritten. “Naturally,” you 
say, “it wasn’t any good.” But think for a moment about the occasions when you spoke 
well. Seldom was it because you first got the beginning just ri ght. Usually it was a 
matter of a halting or even garbled beginning, but you kept goi ng and your speech 
finally became coherent and even powerful. There is a lesson he re for writing: trying 
to get the beginning just right is a formula for failure - and probably a secret tactic to 
make yourself give up writing. Make some words, whatever they a re, and then grab 
hold of that line and reel in as hard as you can. Afterwards you can throw away lousy 
beginnings and make new ones. This is the quickest way to get into good writing.
The habit of compulsive, premature editing doesn’t just make wr iting hard. It also 
makes writing dead. Your voice is damped out by all the interru ptions, changes, and 
hesitations between the consciousness and the page. In your natural way of producing 
words there is a sound, a texture, a rhythm - a voice - which i s the main source of 
power in your writing. I don’t know how it works, but this voic e is the force that will 

=== PAGE 23 ===

 English: Grade 11 16
make a reader listen to you, the energy that drives the meanings through his thick skull. 
Maybe you don’t like your voice; maybe people have made fun of it. But it’s the only 
voice you’ve got. It’s your only source of power. You better get back into it, no matter 
what you think of it. If you keep writing in it, it may change into something you like 
better. But if you abandon it, you’ll likely never have a voice and never be heard.
Freewritings are vacuums. Gradually you will begin to carry ove r into your regular 
writing some of the voice, force, and connectedness that creep into those vacuums.
Peter Elbow
 Ways with words 
A. The words in the crossword puzzle are from the text. Find th em in the 
text to solve the puzzle based on the clues given below.
Down:
1. to be preoccupied with a 
single topic or emotion
3. to move slowly and 
quietly in a particular 
direction
4. orderly, logical and 
consistent
Across:
2. to utter rapidly or 
unintelligibly
5. to insert something 
between other things
6. an unreadable 
handwriting
B. Use the following words in sentences of your own. 
massive, consciousness, catch-as-catch-can, give up, abandon, lousy, editing

=== PAGE 24 ===

English: Grade 11 17
C. Word formation: Adjectives and Adverbs
a. Read the following sentences from the text and notice the wo rds that are 
underlined.
i. Do free writing exercises regularly.
ii. Go quickly without rushing.
iii. No wonder the producer gets nervous, jumpy, inhibited, and finally can’t be coherent.
iv. You can throw away lousy beginnings and make new ones.
The underlined words in (a) and (b) are adverbs, and in (c) and (d) are adjectives. 
Notice that we can form adverbs by adding the suffix ‘-ly’ to an adjective, and adjective 
by adding the suffix ‘-y’ to a noun.
Note that adding the suffix ‘-ly’ to the noun makes that noun a n adjective (e.g. friend 
– friendly, love – lovely, beast – beastly, scholar – scholarly, month –monthly, etc.).
b. Write the following words in the right columns. Change the a djectives into 
adverbs and nouns into adjectives, as shown in the example. 
rain, careful, bush, spice, perfect, automatic, snow, blood, certain, cloud, fair, general, 
heavy, bag, proud, rapid, mood, noise, proper, air, final, common, beautiful, frequent, 
snow, hungry, cream, dust, ease, ice, oil, spice fun, hand, greed, health, hill
Adjectives Adverbs Nouns Adjectives
careful
...............
carefully 
............
rain
............
rainy
..................
c. Fill in the gaps with the appropriate adjective or adverb.
i. Pramila is playing …… (quiet/quietly).
ii. Hari speaks very …… (loud/loudly).
iii. Mukesh is a …… (careful/carefully) driver.
iv. The test was …… (easy/easily) and we finished in time.
v. He is fitting the …… (automatic/automatically) door in my ho use.
vi. My uncle speaks …… (perfect/perfectly) Chinese.
vii. It was raining very …… (heavy/heavily).
viii. She looked very …… (calm/calmly), but I am sure she was f eeling very 
nervous.

=== PAGE 25 ===

 English: Grade 11 18
 Comprehension 
Answer the following questions.
a. Why is freewriting also called ‘automatic writing’?
b. How do you differentiate writing from speaking?
c. What is the biggest obstacles in the writing process, accord ing to Elbow? Do you 
agree with him? Why? Why not?
d. How can freewriting overcome ‘writer’s block’?
e. What do you mean by ‘voice’ in writing?
f. Elbow uses a simile to explain that freewriting “is like wri ting something and 
putting it in a bottle in the sea.” What does this mean? Explain. 
 Critical thinking 
a. How does the author persuade readers in this essay? What is he trying to 
communicate to the readers? 
b. Elbow said, freewriting “is an exercise in bringing together  the process of 
producing words and putting them down on the page.” Do you agre e with his 
statement? Why? Why not?
c. How did you learn to write? What was particularly difficult in writing? What 
inspired you to write? What are some of the challenges that you  still face while 
writing?
Writing
Freewriting
Freewriting is like brainstorming. It is simply exploring your ideas through writing. 
When you freewrite, you write whatever comes into your mind on the topic. You write 
without stopping. Most of the freewriting exercises are of short duration – around five 
or ten minutes. When you freewrite, you need not worry about th e formal structures, 
mechanics or grammar. 
A. Decide a topic of your choice for free writing exercise. Wri te a 
paragraph on the topic for five minutes. Do not stop for spelling or go 
back. Just write as much as you can. When you finish, you can s hare 
(verbally) what you wrote to your friends. 

=== PAGE 26 ===

English: Grade 11 19
Paragraph organization
A paragraph is usually a group of sentences on a topic. Most of  the paragraphs are 
often five to ten sentences long, but they can be longer or sho rter depending on the 
topic. 
A paragraph has a topic sentence, supporting sentences and a concluding sentence. The 
topic sentence introduces the topic with a controlling idea, th e supporting sentences 
further explain the topic sentence and the concluding sentence often repeats the 
information in the topic sentence in a different way. The topic  sentence is usually the 
first sentence of the paragraph and the concluding sentence is the last.  
B. Read the following paragraph. Identify the topic sentence an d the 
concluding sentence.
Students require more recreational time in order to better focu s on lessons in class. 
In fact, studies have shown that students who enjoy a recess of  more than 45 minutes 
consistently score better on tests immediately following the re cess period. Clinical 
analysis further suggests that physical exercise greatly improves the ability to focus on 
academic materials. Longer periods of recess are clearly required to allow students the 
best possible chances of success in their studies. Clearly, physical exercise is just one 
of the necessary ingredients for improving student scores on standardized tests. 
C. Write a paragraph on any one of the following topics.
a. My school library
b. Moral values I like most 
Grammar
Position of adverbs
A. Study these sentences.
a. Perhaps  she is not coming to the party.
b. I sometimes visit him in the supermarket.
c. He drove the car carefully.
Here the words in bold are adverbs. Adverbs can be placed at the front, in the middle 
or at the end position of a clause or sentence. 

=== PAGE 27 ===

 English: Grade 11 20
B. Rewrite the following sentences with the adverbs in the appropriate place.
a. I watch television. (often) 
b. Have you been to Janakpur? (ever) 
c. They play football on Saturdays. (sometimes) 
d. The weather is bad in November. (always) 
e. We have fish for dinner. (seldom) 
f. Pritam doesn't get up before seven. (usually) 
g. I was very tired and I was hungry. (also)
h. Did you enjoy the flight? (both)
C. Rewrite the following sentences placing the underlined words  in the 
right position.
a. I never have understood her.
b. We are often invited to the parties.
c. We all were tired, so we all fell asleep.
d. Rajan drives always to work.
e. Pradip hardly ever watches television, but he reads newspape rs a lot.
f. We enjoyed very much the party.
g. My brother speaks ﬂ  uently English.
Listening
A. Look at the picture and answer these questions. 
a. Is the girl happy or anxious?
b. Why do you think the girl is worried?
B. Listen to the recording and mark True or False. 
a. Clare has got a history examination on Friday. 
b. Clare’s notes are too short.
c. Mark explains that she doesn't need to write everything in n otes. 
d. Mark draws a picture of heart and writes an ‘H’ instead of ‘ King Henry’.
e. Mark's way of taking notes doesn't work for Clare.
C. What are your ideas about preparing notes for study and examination? 
Discuss.


=== PAGE 28 ===

English: Grade 11 21
Speaking
Expressing agreement/disagreement
A. Study the expressions of agreement and disagreement in the f ollowing 
table. 
Agreeing Partly agreeing Disagreeing
You’re right.
Exactly.
I agree.
Of course
Undoubtedly
I completely agree.
You’re absolutely right.
I totally agree with you.
Absolutely!
I see exactly what you mean!
That’s exactly what I think.
There is no doubt about it.
That’s partly true, 
but …
That may be true, 
but…
I see your point, 
but …
I guess so, but…
I’m not so sure 
about that.
I agree up to a 
point, but …
That’s not right!
I totally disagree!
I don’t agree!
I don’t agree with you.
I’m sorry, but I disagree.
Absolutely not!
A complete 'No'
I’m afraid I can’t agree with you.
That’s not always true.
I don’t think so.
No, that’s not true.
No way!
B. Here are some statements that you can agree or disagree with . Talk to 
each other using expressions of agreement and disagreement. 
Project Work
Work in a group of five and list five hobbies like travelling, photography, etc. Create 
a pack of statement cards for each hobby (for example, Photography is an expensive 
hobby). Each person in the group picks up  a card and reads out the statement. The 
players take turns to say if they agree or disagree with the statement and give reasons 
for their opinion.
Winter is the best 
season. 
It is easy to learn 
English.Travelling to the 
remote places is 
important because it is 
adventurous.Life is easier 
for children now 
and 20 years ago. 
Use of smart phone 
in the classroom is not 
good. 

=== PAGE 29 ===

 English: Grade 11 22
Unit 3 Media and Society
“The death of a billionaire is worth more to the media than the  lives of a billion poor 
people.”  - Mokokoma Mokhonoana
Reading
Social Media: Its Influence and Control over People’s Lives
 Before you read 
Look at the picture and discuss. 
a. What does each icon in the box mean?
b. Do you have a Facebook or Twitter account? 
What do you do with them?
c. Do you think social media can have 
influence in the society? How?
Read the following blog about how social media influence and co ntrol people’s 
lives causing them to get distracted in the society. 
What comes to your mind when you hear the term ‘Social Media’? Perhaps, some 
people think the social as the media that makes them able to me et and communicate 
with people around the world. While some others think that, it is the channel that gives 
them the chance to send and receive information. Others might see it as the tool to get 
many updates from people who we follow and a part of a new marketing strategy.
Nowadays, social media seems like a big part 
of our life. When you have no reply to your 
text from you friend, you can greet them on 
Facebook. When you want to listen to music 
or watch a music video from your favourite 
singer you can go to YouTube. When you 
just wake up and open your eyes, you don’t 
have to walk outside to get the newspaper, 
just take your phone and scroll your Twitter 
timeline then you’ll get the information. Blog 
and Forum are also types of social media 
because they allow you to share “what you 


=== PAGE 30 ===

English: Grade 11 23
think” about articles, pictures, videos and so on. Social media not only allows the users 
to share about their profession, major of study, works and company, addresses, political 
views and religion, but also allows them to find a job and to find the employees required. 
In fact, everything looks and feels easier to do with social media.
But from the examples above, I have a question in my mind. “If everything looks and 
feels easier to do with social media, isn't something strange? Isn't society extremely 
dependent on social media? How strongly can social media influe nce and control 
people’s lives?” This question leads me to recall a very interesting case in Indeonesia 
that happened about some years ago.
In August 2008, there was a woman who 
was known by Indonesian people as Prita 
Mulyasari. Her case began when she 
wrote about her disappointment about 
the services of a Hospital in Jakarta. She 
wrote everything about the hospital and 
the bad services that she got from the 
doctors, nurses and administration staff. Then she sent a messa ge to her friends on 
the mailing list. Actually, she just tried to remind her friend s to be more selective in 
choosing the hospital and to be more careful in accepting many kinds of services. But, 
her message became a big problem after her friend shared it to a website (The People’s 
Forum) which so many read and commented about the issue.
In September 2008, the management of the hospital reported Prit a Mulyasari for the 
bad news she has spread about the hospital. The management of t he hospital claimed 
for material loss of about Rp.161 million as a replacement for clarification in national 
newspapers and Rp.100 million for immaterial losses. She wasn’t  only to pay for the 
hospital losses but she was also detained in May 2009. After 8 months she went through 
the inspection and verification process and was convicted by th e court for violating 
the law about using the ICT (Information and Communication Technology). This case 
got rapidly spread among Indonesian people. As common issues, there are always pros 
and cons. Although the Indonesian people didn't justify what Prita had done against the 
hospital, most of them really cared about her life and her cond ition and tried to help 
her, at least to pay the amercement.
The first Facebook account which was made by some people is (https://www.facebook.
com/KoinPeduliPrita). They were spreading “Bantu Bebaskan Prita ” or “Help Free 


=== PAGE 31 ===

 English: Grade 11 24
Prita” among Indonesian People and approached them to help Prit a by collecting the 
coins. It didn’t take a long time. Many volunteers, social work ers, activists, students 
and even artists came together to help her. They were collectin g many coins from 
people on the street, office, and even an entertainment centre. Some singers also held a 
charity concert to help her. In December 2009, the campaign was concluded and they 
succeeded in collecting the coins to help Prita, about Rp. 825 million. The money was 
extremely worth it for Prita, although she still had to go through the period of detainees. 
However, the money was very helpful for her not only to pay the amercement but also 
for her life, considering she had two kids to bring up.
I’m not trying to spread bad news about my country or discredit  someone or some 
institutions. I am just trying to make you believe that social media has the strength to 
influence and control people’s lives. Prita’s case clearly explains to us that social media 
were able to make people’s life get worse or get better. It certainly does not mean that 
we need to stay away or become anti-social media. People are st ronger than social 
media because we can easily think before we act and think befor e we speak. There is 
nothing to be worried about if we are wise when we share something on social media.
Aulia Maharani Karli 
 Ways with words 
A. Find the words from the text that have the following meaning s. 
a. a personal or corporate website
b. a job requiring expertise in a particular field
c. a feeling of sadness
d. put under custody
e. found guilty
f. breaking or disregarding rules or system
g. advantages and disadvantages
h. a non-statutory monetary penalty
B. Study the underlined phrases in the following sentences.
Perhaps some people think about the media that makes them able to meet and 
communicate with people around the world.
When you want to listen to music or watch a music video from yo ur favourite singer 
you can go to YouTube.

=== PAGE 32 ===

English: Grade 11 25
These are prepositional verbs. A prepositional verb is a combination of a verb and a 
preposition. It is simply a verb followed by a preposition (prepositional verb = verb 
+ preposition). 
Now, use the following prepositional verbs in sentences.
apologize to adapt to devote to refer to reply to
admire for apply for pray for scold for vote for
aim at arrive at glance at look at bring up
agree on comment on concentrate on rely on count on
grow up escape from recover from resign from suffer from
separate from worry about argue about boast about dream about
acquaint with agree with charge with trust with confuse with
believe in involve in succeed in specialize in absorb in
 Comprehension 
A. Fill in the gaps with appropriate words/phrases from the tex t.
a. People are using social media for individual as well as …… p urposes.
b. Social media is  not only a platform of sharing views, but also a platform of 
……
c. The hospital wanted Prita to pay Rp. 100 million for ……
d. Some singers organized …… to help Prita.
e. The campaign to help Prita was able to collect Rp. ……
B. Answer these questions.
a. How do you define social media?
b. Social media has been an integral part of modern life. How?
c. Why do people use Facebook and YouTube?
d. What is a blog? How can it be beneficial to us?
e. Was Prita’s intention bad when she sent a message to her fri ends?
f. How did Prita's message become a big problem?
g. Why was she convicted by the court?
h. What was the purpose of the campaign, “ Bantu Bebaskan Prita”?
i. How are people stronger than social media?

=== PAGE 33 ===

 English: Grade 11 26
 Critical thinking 
a. Does social media have positive impact in the society? Discu ss. 
b. How do you compare virtual communication and face-to-face co mmunication? 
Writing
a. There are different schools of thought regarding the social media. Some people 
see the benefits while others see problems in them. What are your observations? 
Explain the advantages and disadvantages of the social media gi ving your 
position in it. 
b. What is cyber bullying? What are its effects? How can it be stopped? 
Grammar
Prepositions of direction
A. Look at the following prepositions of direction with example s.
Preposition Example
away from Why are you going away from me?
across She walked across the road.
along A soldier walked along the rope.
out of He came out of the room.
up to He came up to her and asked a question.
past Th  e bullet whistled past my right ear.
through Th  e river runs through the woods.
to Th  is bus goes to Dhankuta.
into Th  e thief jumped into a car and drove away.
round We travelled  round the country.
onto Th  e cat climbed onto the roof.
towards He started walking towards the library.
off Don’t jump off  that wall.

=== PAGE 34 ===

English: Grade 11 27
B. Complete the following sentences using the correct prepositi ons of 
direction: to, toward,  onto, or into.
a. Prem drove Milan …… the airport.
b. The plane landed …… the runway.
c. The kids climbed …… the monkey bars.
d. Manish and Richa moved the table …… the dining room.
e. Ganesh almost fell …… the river.
f. Lalit and Sarita took the bus that was heading …… the univer sity.
C. Complete the sentences with the correct preposition from the  brackets.
a. While we were hiking …… the forest, we saw a mountain lion. (across/
through/along/under)
b. The leopards walked in a circle …… the baby giraffe before t hey attacked. 
(into/towards/round/through)
c. Go …… the building and turn left. (into/up/off/out of)
d. She ran …… home when she was eighteen. (towards/away from/do wn/
across)
e. Raindrops ran …… the windscreen making it difficult to see t he road.
(into/up/down/over)
f. Hemanta put the plate …… the table and began to eat his dinn er. (onto/
into/up/off)
g. The frightened deer disappeared …… the forest. (up/onto/into /toward)
h. We were driving …… the City Centre when we had an accident. (up/into/
towards/along)
i. The smoke from the fire went …… into the sky. (into/up/to/on to)
Listening
A. Answer these questions.
a. Do you prefer television or radio programme?
b. Which is your favourite television programme?


=== PAGE 35 ===

 English: Grade 11 28
c. Which is your favourite radio programme?
B. Listen to the TV programme about The Function of Mass Media in 
the society and fill in the blanks with correct words. 
a. Television, radio and internet are …… of mass communication.
b. Shankar Gandhi is invited on television studio as ……
c. One of the objectives of the programme is to gain and unders tand about 
basic principles of ……
d. Mass communication is categorised according to …… production , 
transmission and reception.
e. Billboards, signs and placards are the examples of ……
f. Internet is becoming …… of mass media.
C. Match the given mass media with their starting date. 
a. Print media i. about 1900 AD
b. Cinema ii. 2000 AD 
c. Television iii. late 15
th century
d. Mobile phone iv. 1950 AD
D. Which is your favourite mass media? Why? Give your reasons.
Speaking
Giving directions
A. Study the following expressions about asking for and giving directions.
Asking for directions Giving directions
How can I get to the office?
How do I get to the health post?
What's the best way to get to your house?
Can you please tell me how I can get 
to Pushpalal Chowk?
Excuse me, could you tell me how to get 
to the bus station?
Go straight on till you see the hospital 
then turn left.
Go along here/Go along Green Street.
Go as far as the bus stop.
Turn left/right.
Take the first/second/third turning on the 
left/right.


=== PAGE 36 ===

English: Grade 11 29
Excuse me, do you know where the post 
office is?
Excuse me, how do I get to the bus station?
Is this the way to Durbar Square?
Is there a bank around/near here?
How do I get to the mall?
Do you know the way to the Nepal 
Academy?
You are going the wrong way.
I’m sorry I can’t help you as I’m not from 
around here.
Yes, there is one right across the street 
next to the Library.
Take the second road on the left and you 
will see the hospital straight ahead.
You have to go straight along this road for 
about 200 metres. Turn right when you 
see Bhrikuti Street. Go on straight ahead 
till you see the Trinity supermarket. The 
mall is opposite to the supermarket.
It’s this way\It’s that way.
B. How do we get to the zoo from the school as it is marked in the map? 
Work in pairs and give directions to your friend.
 Giving instructions 
A. Act out the following conversation.
Gopal: Excuse me, are you busy? I need your help.
Asta: Sure! What can I do for you?
Gopal: Can you tell me how to operate a washing machine?
Asta: First open and put clothes into the washing machine. Then  put washing 
detergent into detergent compartment. (You can use liquid or powder) 
Gopal: Just a moment, let me write this down.


=== PAGE 37 ===

 English: Grade 11 30
Asta: Add bleach or fabric softener in its compartment. And the n choose 
programme and select temperature according to the fabric type. 
Gopal: Can you repeat it?
Asta: Add bleach or fabric softener in its compartment. And the n choose 
programme and select temperature according to the fabric type.
Gopal: Ok, after that? 
Asta: You just press START. But remember! Don't open the door w hile on 
function.
Gopal: Thank you, Asta. 
Asta: Not at all.
B. Work in pairs and ask for and give instructions.
a. How to open Facebook/Twitter/Gmail account
b. How to book online air ticket
Project Work
Look at the status of Facebook of your Facebook friends in the last 24 hours or last 
two days. Do not write their names or any other identity. Categ orize the information 
into various groups and critically discuss how you find them. E xplain what kind of 
messages the users were trying to communicate, whether or not the messages have any 
ethical issues, how people might perceive the messages on the status.

=== PAGE 38 ===

English: Grade 11 31
Unit 4 History and Culture
“Th e greatest glory is not in never falling, but rising every time we fall. ” – Confucius
Reading
Qin Dynasty
 Before you read 
Look at the picture and discuss.
a. What do you see in the picture?
b. When was this structure built?
c. Who made it?
Read the following text about the contribution of the Qin Dynas ty in Chinese 
history and culture.
The Qin Dynasty has a short duration (221-206 
BCE), but very important in Chinese history. It 
followed the Zhou Dynasty (1046-256 BCE) 
and it ended when Liu Bang became the king 
of Han in 206 BCE (the formal beginning of 
the Han Dynasty). Despite its brevity, the Qin 
Dynasty left important marks on Chinese culture. 
In fact, the name "China" is derived from the 
name Qin (“Ch’in” in former Romanisation 
systems). Following the Zhou Dynasty, China 
became involved in a seemingly endless conflict 
between the various regions for supreme control of the country. This period of conflict 
has come to be known as The Warring States Period (426-221 BCE) . A series of 
victories by the state of Qin towards the end of the Warring St ates Period resulted in 
their complete conquest of China in 221 BCE when the Qin Empire unified China for 
the first time in its history.
Origins of the Qin Kingdom
During the Zhou Dynasty, China was never a unified kingdom. The Zhou government bore 
a strong resemblance to some of the forms of feudalism in medieval Europe, which is 
why the Zhou age is sometimes referred to as a feudal age. Chin a was composed of a 


=== PAGE 39 ===

 English: Grade 11 32
network of city-states loyal to the Zhou king, from which military and political control 
spread over the surrounding farming villages.
About 771 BCE, a barbarian invasion drove the Zhou rulers eastw ards. During this 
time, the state of Qin became responsible for guarding the west ern frontier and they 
gradually moved eastward and eventually occupied the original Z hou domains. Thus, 
the Qin became a close ally of the Zhou and they also had marriage relations with the 
Zhou ruling class. King Ping of Zhou (770-720 BCE) transferred titles of the nobility 
and huge estates to the chief of Qin. Many Chinese historians c onsider this event as 
pivotal for the state of Qin. The Qin was, at that time, very aware of the fact that they 
could be a great power. The elevation to nobility of the Qin me ant that the Qin could 
become more ambitious and better fend off attacks from surround ing regions. As a 
consequence, these centuries spent fighting non-Chinese tribes helped the Qin gain 
invaluable experience in warfare and territorial expansion.
Of the many Chinese states, the Qin had the advantage of a favo urable location: Its 
territory in modern Shaanxi Province is well guarded from the e ast by mountains and 
gorges and has easy access to the North China plain through the Yellow River passes. 
No major battle ever took place in the Qin’s heartland.
During the Warring States period, all the states in China were trying to draw more 
power and prestige to themselves. The states of Qin and Chu 
were the strongest which was due, in part, to the locations 
of these two states being able to command vast resources. 
They were also able to expand their borders without fear 
of immediate conflict, unlike the other states, and so could 
obtain still further resources. This benefit, and others such as 
the size of the Qin army and their expert use of the chariot, 
contributed to their success in warfare. The Qin had all of 
the resources and advantages but what finally gave them 
victory over the other states was their ruthlessness in battle.  
The Qin statesman Shang Yang (356-338 BCE) advocated 
total war and a disregard for the polite policies of battle whi ch the Chinese Generals 
had always adhered to. His lessons were implemented by Ying Zheng, King of the Qin, 
who emerged victorious from the Warring States Period and procl aimed himself Shi 
Huangdi - `first emperor' - of China in 221 BCE. About 230 BCE,  when the final 
campaign to unify China began, it is estimated that the Qin controlled one-third of all 
the land under cultivation in China and one-third of China’s total population.
Qi Shi Huangdi

=== PAGE 40 ===

English: Grade 11 33
Achievements in the Qin Dynasty
Early in the Qin Empire, the practice of Legalism reached its peak in Chinese history. This 
idea of state policy was devised by Shang Yang who came to Qin as a foreign advisor. 
Qin was lacking, early on, in skilled intellectuals 
and politicians and, therefore, had to look beyond 
its borders for talented people. Shang Yang was 
one of those foreign talented persons and he would 
have a lasting influence on the Qin Empire. During 
his time as a minister, Shang Yang radically 
renovated the policies of government but, in fact, 
he simply revived a practice which was already 
present for years: a form of government with a 
focus on greater efficiency and less adherence 
to tradition in which strict adherence to the letter of the law  was made paramount. 
Emperor Shi Huangdi approved of Shang Yang's policies and imple mented them 
across his realm.
This form of government consisted of a collectivisation programme and the decimation 
of aristocratic power. Farmers were freed from serfdom and Shi Huangdi reduced the 
power of the aristocracy. The people throughout the empire were  now supposed to 
bear collective responsibility for each other. If a person did not behave according to 
the rules, then others were required to report to him. If they did not do this, they were 
quartered or beheaded. Fear and control were the key features of this political system. 
In addition, one's personal importance to the empire was also a key element. If you, as 
a person, meant nothing to the state, you actually meant nothing objectively; your life 
was meaningless. Those who contributed the most to the state we re highly rewarded 
while those whose lives were considered of no consequence were sent to work as 
slaves on Shi Huangdi's building projects such as the Great Wal l of China, the Grand 
Canal, and the roads which increased ease of trade and travel.
Another result of the Legalism of Shi Huangdi was that scholars hip was strongly 
suppressed and literacy denied to the majority of the populace.  Shi Huangdi believed 
that uneducated people were easier to control and so the people  should remain stupid 
so that they would never think to doubt who was in charge of th e empire. This policy 
resulted in the burning of books on a large scale and, in 212 BCE, on the advice of his 
chief advisor Li Siu, Shi Huangdi had scholars executed on a large scale. Books were 
banned throughout the empire, as was teaching, except for subjects touching upon the 
Grand Canal

=== PAGE 41 ===

 English: Grade 11 34
re-written history of the Qin Dynasty, Legalism, or the personal glory of Shi Huangdi. 
It was not until the later Han Dynasty that books were recovere d from hiding and 
repaired, and literacy was again available to the people of China.
Although Shi Huangdi and Shang Yang's Legalism (as well as Li Siu's policies) were 
hated by many at the time (and have been generally frowned upon  by scholars of the 
period), later the Qin kings and emperors of China were well aw are of the strong 
impact that Legalism had on the efficiency and strength of the state. Legalism helped 
to create a superior army, a disciplined bureaucracy, an obedie nt populace, and the 
unquestioned authority of a strong central government. This bur eaucratic model 
became the standard for the Chinese government and is still maintained in some form 
today. Although Confucianism was preferred in later dynasties, Legalism continued 
to exert a strong influence in China. It was often the case that the harsh Legalism was 
glossed over with just a different name and, quite often, as `Confucianism'.
The End of the Qin Empire
In the year 210 BCE emperor Shi Huangdi died on a journey throu gh the realm. The 
people were told that these trips were designed for the inspect ion of the empire but 
later evidence suggests that the emperor was looking for an elixir of immortality. In his 
later years, Shi Huangdi became obsessed with death and the hop e of eternal life. In 
constant fear of assassination, it is said, he never slept in the same room of his palace two 
nights consecutively and he ordered the construction of his elaborate tomb (including 
his Terracotta Army of 8,000 warriors) early on in his reign. The cause of his death is 
still unknown.
Li Siu (c. 280–208 BCE), the then prime minister of the recentl y deceased emperor, 
tried to hide the fact that Shi Huangdi was deceased in any pos sible way. He brought 
the emperor's body back to the capital along with carts of dead  fish to mask the smell 
of the corpse. Along with Zhao Gao (died 208/207 BCE), Li Siu c ontrived to place 
Hu Hai on the throne. Hu Hai was the weak second son of Shi Hua ngdi. Due to the 
weakness of Hu Hai, the oppressed people of China grew bolder a nd soon began to 
revolt.
Through a series of uprisings and rebel alliances, the Qin authority was overthrown in 
the year 206 BCE in the capital of Xianyang. The Imperial House was massacred and 
the Qin Dynasty was thus at an end. A complicated series of bat tles followed for the 
honour of being the successor to the Qin Dynasty which resulted in the period known 
as the Chu-Han Contention in which Xiang-Yu of the state of Chu  fought Liu Bang 

=== PAGE 42 ===

English: Grade 11 35
of Han for supremacy. Liu Bang emerged victorious following Xia ng-Yu's defeat at 
the Battle of Gaixia in 202 BCE. Liu Bang (247 BCE- 195 BCE) wa s applauded as a 
man of the people and, after his victory, founded the Han Dynasty.
Legacy of the Qin Dynasty
As mentioned previously, Legalism had a lasting 
effect on the entirety of Chinese history. The Qin 
Dynasty created the standard of bureaucratic 
government and the Legalistic policies first 
initiated by the Qin are still seen in China 
today. In addition, the dynasty left a wonder of 
ancient artwork: The Terracotta Army in Xi'an. 
This tomb reflects the character of the Chinese 
emperor and his unending desire to be immortal. 
The Terracotta Army also exemplifies what Chinese society at th at time was able to 
produce once it had been formed as a state. The most famous leg acy left by the Qin 
is The Great Wall of China. Although the present structure does  not date from the 
Qin Dynasty, it was begun under Shi Huangdi, as was the Grand Canal, and the roads 
which today link the cities of China and the countryside. The Q in did more than just 
found a dynasty in China: they brought a continent together.
Gabriel Peralta
NOTES
Feudalism: a socio-political system that existed in Europe during the Middle Ages in 
which people worked and fought for the nobles who gave them protection and the use 
of land in return
Legalism: an ancient Chinese philosophical belief that human beings are more inclined 
to do the wrong than the right because they are motivated entir ely by self-interest. It 
was developed by the philosopher Han Feizi (c. 280-233 BCE).
Confucianism: the system of ethics, education, and statesmanship taught by the 
Chinese philosopher Confucius (551–479 BCE) and his disciples, stressing love for 
humanity, ancestor worship, reverence for the parents, and harm ony in thought and 
conduct
Terracotta Army

=== PAGE 43 ===

 English: Grade 11 36
 Ways with words 
A. Match the words with their meanings.
a. brevity i. the state of being alike
b. conquest ii. a member of an uncivilised group of people or c ulture
c. resemblance iii. state of being noble in character, quality,  or rank
d. barbarian iv. liquid that is believed to cure all ills
e. ally v. lasting only for a short time
f. nobility vi. cruel 
g. ruthlessness vii. victory over a place or people by use of m ilitary force
h. decimation viii. the killing or destruction of a large numbe r of a population
i. harsh ix. character of having no pity or compassion
j. elixir x. one state united to another by a treaty or a league for a military purpose
B. Find the following words in the text and use them in sentenc es of your 
own.
invasion      disregard      paramount        populace       revolt       assassination        serfdom
C. Study the following homographs.
address (noun): the location of a house)
adDRESS (verb) to speak to a group of people)
DEcrease (n.): reduction in the amount of something)
deCREASE (v.): to become smaller in amount)
PREsent (n.): a gift)
preSENT (v.): to give something formally)
PROtest (n.): objection to something by an organised group of people)
proTEST (v.): to express an objection)
CONtest (n.): a game or event of completion)
conTEST (v.): to challenge or dispute)
RECord (n): a written account of information)
reCORD (v.): to keep or store information for future use)
Homographs are the words with different pronunciations and different meanings 
but same spellings. However, the words here have a change in the word stress 
often causing changes in the vowel sounds. 

=== PAGE 44 ===

English: Grade 11 37
D. Consult a dictionary and prepare a list of ten homographs.
E. Read the limerick, the stressed words are in uppercase.
I KNEW a MAN whose NAME was SHAW.
He ATE a ROCK and BROKE his JAW.
WHAT do you THINK?
He SAID, with a WINK.
PerHAPS it’s BAD to EAT them RAW.
A limerick is a funny rhyming verse of five lines with the rhyme pattern aabba. 
Remember, limericks emphasise English sentence stress. 
F. Here is a very old limerick taken from a book ‘A Book of Non sense’ 
by Edward Lear. Practise it with the help of your teacher and find the 
stressed words.
There once was a fly on the wall.
I wondered ‘why didn’t it fall’?
Were its feet stuck?
Or was it just luck?
Or does gravity miss so small?
 Comprehension 
A. Complete the table with the correct information from the tex t.
Qin Dynasty Period
Zhou Dynasty Period
Warring States Period
Unifi cation of China by Qin
First Emperor of Qin Dynasty
Death of Shi Huangdi
Liu Bang Period

=== PAGE 45 ===

 English: Grade 11 38
B. Answer these questions.
a. Why is the Zhou Age called a feudal age?
b. What is the location advantage of the Qin?
c. What contributed to the success in the warfare as described in the text?
d. Why did the Qin invite the foreign advisor, Shang Yang?
e. What were the key features of the Qin political system?
f. How were the people treated during the Qin Period?
g. Why did Shi Huangdi stop educating ordinary people?
h. What did the Qin achieve by the legalism in practice?
i. Why did Shi Huangdi never sleep in the same room for two con secutive 
nights?
j. What are the everlasting marks of the Qin Dynasty?
 Critical thinking 
a. The Great Wall and the Taj Mahal are the creation of the aut ocratic rulers. Present 
your view for or against this statement.
b. How do you describe the pros and cons of feudalism?
Writing
a. Write an email to your friend living abroad stating the cont ributions of Prithvi 
Narayan Shah in the unification of Nepal.
b. The table shows the major political movements in Nepal after  the end of the 
Rana Regime. Write a paragraph of each event with their key contributions in the 
political landscape of Nepal.
S. N. Political Movement Year (AD)
1 Establishment of Democracy 1951
2 First General Election 1959
3 Dismissal of Elected Government 1960
4 National Referendum 1980
5 People's Movement I 1990
6 People's Movement II 2006

=== PAGE 46 ===

English: Grade 11 39
Grammar
A. Read this paragraph and classify regular and irregular verbs  in the 
bold face.
About 771 BCE, a barbarian invasion drove the Zhou rulers eastwards. During this 
time, the state of Qin became responsible for guarding the western frontier and they 
gradually moved eastward and eventually occupied the original Zhou domains. Thus, 
the Qin became a close ally of the Zhou and they also had marriage relations with 
the Zhou ruling class. King Ping of Zhou (r. 770-720 BCE) transferred titles of the 
nobility and huge estates to the chief of Qin.
Past simple is used to talk about a single action or series of actions that happened in 
the past.
B. Complete the texts below using the correct past forms of the  verbs 
from the bracket.
a. The Maya established a very advanced civilisation in the jun gles of the 
Yucatan. However, their culture……………. (disappear) by the time 
Europeans first …………… (arrive) in the New World.
b. When I ………(turn) on the radio yesterday, I ……….(hear) a song  that 
was popular when I ……(be) at the basic level of my study. It …… ….. 
(take) me back to some old memories.
c. I was looking for a job. I……….(apply) for a job last week. F ortunately, 
I…… (get) it and now I am a job holder.
C. Choose the correct words from the list and complete the sent ences 
with the correct verb form.
teach         write         see            get up           throw             cost
a. Newton………….an apple falling from the tree.
b. Ramesh Bikal…………..many popular stories.
c. My jacket is expensive. It……….me Rs 5000.
d. She………….early in the morning yesterday.
e. When I was small, my father………..me at home.
f. Why did you………….the cap away?

=== PAGE 47 ===

 English: Grade 11 40
D. Put the verb into the correct form and complete the sentence s.
a. I went to see the film, but I…………..it. (not/enjoy)
b. I…………..Rojina in town in a few days ago. (meet)
c. It was very warm, so I………..my coat. (take off)
d. Though the bed was very comfortable, I………very well. (not/sle ep)
e. I ............. new job last week. (start)
f. He ................ too busy in the office yesterday. (be)
g. Nita…………. her to the party, but she didn’t come. (invite)
Listening
A. Look at the picture and answers the questions.
a. What do you see in the picture?
b. What do you see on the forehead?
c. What does it symbolise?
B. Listen to the audio and write True for true statements and F alse for 
false ones.
a. The centre of the head is similar to the centre of the unive rse.
b. The secret symbol is inconsistent in different cultures and religions.
c. The third eye connects us to the great unknown force of the universe.
d. We are indirectly connected to the extraterrestrial beings.
C. Listen to the audio again and answer the following questions .
a. What is the shape of the centre in human beings?
b. Where do we see the symbol of third eye in Buddhism?
c. What is cosmic egg?
d.  What does the cosmic egg represent? 
D. Collect other information about the third eye and share with  friends.
Speaking
A. Read the following text loudly.
I'm Anupama. I travelled from Jumla to Surkhet by flight on Jun e 5, 2019. It was my 
first flight experience. I reached the airport at 9:30 am. After some formal chit chat, I 


=== PAGE 48 ===

English: Grade 11 41
went for the security check. The flight was scheduled 
to leave at 10:00 am. The flight was on time and I had 
the window seat. I was waiting for the take off. Before 
the takeoff, the pilot made an announcement. The 
air hostess informed us about safety rules. Now time 
came... Firstly the plane moved on the runway till the 
opposite end. But finally it took an about-turn and the 
speed increased. Within a few seconds I was in the sky. 
The view was breath-taking. The roads and buildings 
seemed like lines and toys. My ears were humming 
initially when the plane increased the height, but later 
on everything was fine. Finally, I reached Surkhet at 10:30 am. It was one of the most 
memorable experiences of my life! 
B. Work in groups of five and narrate your memorable event with  some 
exciting experiences that you had.
Project Work
Find the similarities and differences between the Qin Dynasty i n China and the Rana 
Regime. You can search information on the internet and prepare a comparative chart. 
Once you complete your project, compare it with the charts from your friends.


=== PAGE 49 ===

 English: Grade 11 42
Unit 5 Life and Love
“The best and most beautiful things in this world cannot be see n or even heard, but 
must be felt with the heart.” – Helen Keler
Reading
The Looking Glass
 Before you read 
a. What do you think a looking glass is?
b. Do you dream while you are asleep? Do dreams have meaning in  real life?
c. Do you believe in imagination or reality? Why?
Now read the following story about the dream of a young girl wi th the harsh 
realities in her life.
New Year's Eve. Nellie, the daughter of a landowner and general , a young and 
pretty girl, dreaming day and night of being married, was sitti ng in her room, gazing 
with exhausted, half-closed eyes into the looking-glass. She wa s pale, tense, and as 
motionless as the looking-glass.
The non-existent but apparent vista of a long, narrow corridor with endless rows of 
candles, the reflection of her face, her hands, of the frame - all this was already clouded 
in mist and merged into a boundless grey sea. The sea was undul ating, gleaming and 
now and then flaring crimson. 
Looking at Nellie's motionless eyes and parted lips, one could hardly say whether she 
was asleep or awake, but nevertheless she 
was seeing. At first, she saw only the smile 
and soft, charming expression of someone's 
eyes, then against the shifting grey 
background there gradually appeared the 
outlines of a head, a face, eyebrows, beard. 
It was he, the destined one, the object of 
long dreams and hopes. The destined one 
was for Nellie everything, the significance 
of life, personal happiness, career, fate. 
Outside him, as on the grey background 
of the looking-glass, all was dark, empty, 


=== PAGE 50 ===

English: Grade 11 43
meaningless. And so it was not strange that, seeing before her a handsome, gently 
smiling face, she was conscious of bliss, of an unutterably sweet dream that could not 
be expressed in speech or on paper. Then she heard his voice, saw herself living under 
the same roof with him, her life merged into his. Months and years flew by against the 
grey background. And Nellie saw her future distinctly in all its details.
Picture followed picture against the grey background. Now Nelli e saw herself one 
winter night knocking at the door of Stepan Lukitch, the distri ct doctor. The old dog 
hoarsely and lazily barked behind the gate. The doctor's window s were in darkness. 
All was silence.
"For God's sake, for God's sake!" whispered Nellie. But at last the garden gate creaked 
and Nellie saw the doctor's cook. "Is the doctor at home?"
"His honour's asleep," whispered the cook into her sleeve, as though afraid of waking 
her master. "He's only just got home from his fever patients, a nd gave orders he was 
not to be woken."
But Nellie scarcely heard the cook. Thrusting her aside, she ru shed headlong into the 
doctor's house. Running through some dark and stuffy rooms, ups etting two or three 
chairs, she at last reached the doctor's bedroom. Stepan Lukitch was lying on his bed, 
dressed, but without his coat, and with pouting lips was breathing into his open hand. 
A little night-light glimmered faintly beside him. Without utte ring a word Nellie sat 
down and began to cry. She wept bitterly, shaking all over.
"My husband is ill!" she sobbed out. Stepan Lukitch was silent.  He slowly sat up, 
propped his head on his hand, and looked at his visitor with fi xed, sleepy eyes. "My 
husband is ill!" Nellie continued, restraining her sobs. "For mercy's sake come quickly. 
Make haste. . . . Make haste!"
"Eh?" growled the doctor, blowing into his hand. "Come! Come this very minute! Or . 
. . it's terrible to think! For mercy's sake!"
And pale, exhausted Nellie, gasping and swallowing her tears, began describing to the 
doctor her husband's illness, her unutterable terror. Her sufferings would have touched 
the heart of a stone, but the doctor looked at her, blew into h is open hand, and - not a 
movement.
"I'll come to-morrow!" he muttered. "That's impossible!" cried Nellie. "I know my 
husband has typhus! At once . . . this very minute you are needed!"
"I . . . er . . . have only just come in," muttered the doctor. "For the last three days I've 

=== PAGE 51 ===

 English: Grade 11 44
been away, seeing typhus patients, and I'm exhausted and ill myself. . . . I simply can't! 
Absolutely! I've caught it myself! There!"
And the doctor thrust before her eyes a clinical thermometer. " My temperature is 
nearly forty. . . . I absolutely can't. I can scarcely sit up. Excuse me. I'll lie down. . . ."
The doctor lay down.
"But I implore you, doctor," Nellie moaned in despair. "I besee ch you! Help 
me, for mercy's sake! Make a great effort and come! I will repa y you, doctor!"
"Oh, dear! . . . Why, I have told you already. Ah!"
Nellie leapt up and walked nervously up and down the bedroom. She longed to explain 
to the doctor, to bring him to reason. . . . She thought if onl y he knew how dear her 
husband was to her and how unhappy she was, he would forget his exhaustion and his 
illness. But how could she be eloquent enough?
"Go to the Zemstvo doctor," she heard Stepan Lukitch's voice.
"That's impossible! He lives more than twenty miles from here, and time is precious. 
And the horses can't stand it. It is thirty miles from us to yo u, and as much from here 
to the Zemstvo doctor. No, it's impossible! Come along, Stepan Lukitch. I ask of you 
a heroic deed. Come, perform that heroic deed! Have pity on us!"
"It's beyond everything. . . . I'm in a fever . . . my head's i n a whirl . . . and she won't 
understand! Leave me alone!"
"But you are in duty bound to come! You cannot refuse to come! It's egoism! A man 
is bound to sacrifice his life for his neighbour, and you . . .  you refuse to come! I will 
summon you before the Court."
Nellie felt that she was uttering a false and undeserved insult , but for her husband's 
sake she was capable of forgetting logic, tact, sympathy for others. . . . In reply to her 
threats, the doctor greedily gulped a glass of cold water. Nell ie fell to entreating and 
imploring like the very lowest beggar. . . . At last, the doctor gave way. He slowly got 
up, puffing and panting, looking for his coat.
"Here it is!" cried Nellie, helping him. "Let me put it on to y ou. Come along! I will 
repay you. . . . All my life I shall be grateful to you. . . ."
But what agony! After putting on his coat, the doctor lay down again. Nellie got him 
up and dragged him to the hall. Then there was an agonizing to- do over his galoshes, 
his overcoat. . . . His cap was lost. . . . But at last Nellie was in the carriage with the 

=== PAGE 52 ===

English: Grade 11 45
doctor. Now they had only to drive thirty miles and her husband would have a doctor's 
help. The earth was wrapped in darkness. One could not see one' s hand before one's 
face. . . . A cold winter wind was blowing. There were frozen lumps under their wheels. 
The coachman was continually stopping and wondering which road to take.
Nellie and the doctor sat silent all the way. It was fearfully jolting, but they felt neither 
the cold nor the jolts.
"Get on, get on!" Nellie implored the driver.
At five in the morning, the exhausted horses drove into the yar d. Nellie saw the 
familiar gates, the well with the crane, the long row of stable s and barns. At last, 
she was at home.
"Wait a moment, I will be back directly," she said to Stepan Lu kitch, making him sit 
down on the sofa in the dining-room. "Sit still and wait a litt le, and I'll see how he is 
going on."
On her return from her husband, Nellie found the doctor lying down. He was lying on 
the sofa and muttering.
"Doctor, please! . . . doctor!"
"Eh? Ask Domna!" muttered Stepan Lukitch. "What?"
"They said at the meeting . . . Vlassov said . . . Who? . . . what?"
And to her horror Nellie saw that the doctor was as delirious as her husband. What was 
to be done? "I must go for the Zemstvo doctor," she decided.
Then again there followed darkness, a cutting cold wind, lumps of frozen earth. She 
was suffering in body and in soul, and delusive nature has no a rts, no deceptions to 
compensate these sufferings. . . 
Then she saw against the grey background how her husband every spring was in straits 
for money to pay the interest for the mortgage to the bank. He could not sleep, she 
could not sleep, and both racked their brains till their heads ached, thinking how to 
avoid being visited by the clerk of the Court.
She saw her children: the everlasting apprehension of colds, sc arlet fever, diphtheria, 
bad marks at school, separation. Out of a brood of five or six, one was sure to die.
The grey background was not untouched by death. That might well  be. A husband 
and wife cannot die simultaneously. Whatever happened one must bury the other. And 

=== PAGE 53 ===

 English: Grade 11 46
Nellie saw her husband dying. This terrible event presented itself to her in every detail. 
She saw the coffin, the candles, the deacon, and even the footm arks in the hall made 
by the undertaker.
"Why is it, what is it for?" she asked, looking blankly at her husband's face.
And all the previous life with her husband seemed to her a stupid prelude to this.
Something fell from Nellie's hand and knocked on the floor. She  started, jumped up, 
and opened her eyes wide. One looking-glass she saw lying at her feet. The other was 
standing as before on the table.
She looked into the looking-glass and saw a pale, tear-stained face. There was no grey 
background now. "I must have fallen asleep," she thought with a sigh of relief.
Anton Chekhov  
 Ways with words 
A. Match the words with their meanings.
a. exhausted i. vision
b. apparent ii. wavy
c. vista iii. predetermined
d.  undulating iv.  prevent, hinder 
e.  destined v suffocating, airless
f.  stuffy vi. tired
g.  restrain vii. clear
B. Write the meaning and word class of the following words. The n use 
them in sentences of your own.
implore, despair, beseech, eloquent, whirl, egoism, agony, deli rious, delusive, 
compensate, mortgage, brood, prelude
C. In the story, you saw the words like ‘exhausted’ and ‘smiling’. They are 
used as adjectives. Adjectives ending in –ing describe what som eone 
or something is like, whereas adjectives ending in –ed describe  how 
someone feels. Compare:

=== PAGE 54 ===

English: Grade 11 47
 boring.  bored with my job.
 interesting.  interested in my job.
My job is tiring. I’m tired of doing my job. 
 satisfying.  satisfied with my job.
 pleasing.  pleased with my job.
D. Choose the correct word.
a. Sarita was shocking/shocked to hear about earthquake.
b. I think that rainy days in winter are depressing/depressed.
c. The football match was very exciting/excited. I enjoyed it.
d. The meals at Delight Café are satisfying/satisfied.
e. I've got nothing to do. I'm boring/bored.
f. Tanka is very good at telling funny stories. He can be very amusing/
amused.
g. The teacher's explanation was confusing/confused. Most of the students 
didn't understand it.
h. He is such a boring/bored person. He never wants to go out.
i. I will be surprising/surprised if she does well in her test.
j. Are you interesting/interested in politics?
E. Write the correct form of the adjective in the blanks as in the example.
Example - Grammar rules frustrate me. They're not logical. They are so 
frustrating.
a. They frustrate me but they don't bore me. I never get …… whe n I study 
grammar.
b. If teachers want to interest the students, they must use …… materials.
c. Certain stories interest almost everybody. For example, most  students are  
…… in fairy tales.
d. Certain things frighten me, but I never get  …… when I speak  English.
e. If I get a good grade, that excites me. And if I get more th an ninety percent, 
I am really …… 

=== PAGE 55 ===

 English: Grade 11 48
 Comprehension 
Answer these questions.
a. Who was Nellie? What did she use to dream of?
b. What was she doing with the looking glass?
c. Why did she go to the doctor on one winter night?
d. What was Stepan Lukitch doing when she reached his bedroom?
e. Why was the doctor not ready to go to see her husband?
f. Why did Stepan Lukitch suggest Nellie to go to the Zemstvo d octor?
g. Nellie said, “Come, perform that heroic deed! Have pity on u s!" What was that 
pity to be done?
h. When Nellie said, "I must have fallen asleep." What does it mean?
i. What is the main theme of the story?
 Critical thinking 
a. “The looking glass (mirror)” is used as a symbol in the stor y. What does it 
symbolise?
b. Chekhov employs the magic trick in the story, using a very e legant transition 
from reality to imagination to reality sequence. Discuss its re levance to life of 
young people.
Writing
Write a couple of paragraphs about an interesting dream that you have had. 
Grammar
 Will and be going to
A. Look at these examples.
A: Gita is in hospital. 
B: Oh, really? I’ll go and visit her.
A: Gita is in hospital.
B: Yes, I know. I’m going to visit her this evening.

=== PAGE 56 ===

English: Grade 11 49
B. Match the expressions in column A with their functions in co lumn B.
 A  B
a. A: What do you want to take? i. Promising
     B: I’ll have tea, please.
b. A: Are you free this evening? ii. Threatening
    B: No, I’m going to meet my uncle.
c. The day will be lovely tomorrow. iii. Deciding
d. There is no cloud in the sky. 
 It’s going to be a lovely day. iv. Expressing a prior plan
e. Don’t worry. I won’t tell anyone. v. Predicting a future act ion
f. I'll take you to the movies if you like. vi. Offering
g. I’ll tell your parents what you did. vii. Predicting with ev idence
C. Choose the correct answer.
a. A: Are you busy this evening?
 B: Yes, I……………….the movies. (will go/am going to)
b. A: Where are you going for holiday this summer?
 B: Not sure yet. Maybe I………..to Ilam. (will go/am going to)
c. I think you……..like this movie. (will /are going to )
d. I can’t join you at the party,  I………..be away for two weeks.  (will /am 
going  to)
e. This exercise looks really hard. I…………….help you. (will/am g oing to)
f. A: Hello. Can I speak to Sima, please?
 B: Just a minute. I………get her. (will/am going to)
g. Perhaps she………pass the exam. (will/is going to)
h. ‘I haven’t got my phone.’ ‘That’s OK. I………..lend you mine.’ (will/am 
going to)
D. Complete the sentences using will or be going to with the ve rbs.
a. Hari: Did you call Bina?
 Prem: Oh, I forgot. I………….her now. (call)

=== PAGE 57 ===

 English: Grade 11 50
b. Sunita: Have you got a ticket for the play?
 Hema: Yes, I………….it on Saturday. (watch)
c. ‘The alarm is ringing. It’s making an awful noise.’ ‘OK, I…… ..it off.’ 
(switch)
d. Do you think they………the presents we got for them? (like)
e. ‘Lok is starting university tomorrow.’ ‘What………study?’ (he/s tudy)
f. If I meet him, I………..him the news. (tell)
g. The phone is ringing. I………it. (answer)
h. If you don’t stop bullying her, I……….the teacher. (tell)
Listening
A. Look at the picture and answer these questions.
a. What are people in the picture doing?
b. Tell your partner a picnic experience.


=== PAGE 58 ===

English: Grade 11 51
B. Now listen to the recording and write what the girl is proposing to do 
on these days.  
Days They are going to …..
Monday go down to the lake
Tuesday
Wednesday
Friday
Saturday
C. Work in pairs. Describe a vacation you took by yourself or w ith family 
and friends. Where did you go and what did you do? What did you  
enjoy most about the trip?  
Speaking
Expressing decisions, intentions and plans
A. Read, discuss and act out the following conversation.
Sarita : Hello Alina, what are you going to do this weekend? 
Alina : Hello, I’m going to visit my grandmother. How about you ?
Sarita : Well, I still don’t have any plan for the weekend.
Alina : Why don’t you go to a museum?
Sarita : That’s a good idea. But, I have to do my assignments f irst. Have you done all 
your assignments?
Alina : No, I haven’t. I’d like to do 
them this evening.
Sarita : Well, can we do them 
together?
Alina : Yes, of course.
Sarita : Okay, great. I’ll come to your 
house at 4 pm then.
Alina : I’ll be waiting for you.


=== PAGE 59 ===

 English: Grade 11 52
B. Study the examples.
a. We're going to get a new car soon. (It's our decision)
b. I'm going to wash my hair. (That's my intention)
c. Will you come to my party? Sorry, I'm going to help Lola. (p rior plan/
arrangement)
C. Work in pairs. Talk about your decisions, intentions and pla ns on the 
following.
a. making money
b. next year
c. after your exam
d. coming Saturday
e. further study
Project Work
Work in groups of four. Develop a series of pictures to reflect  the lifestyle of Nepali 
people from different parts of the country and display it in class.

=== PAGE 60 ===

English: Grade 11 53
Unit 6 Health and Exercise
“Take care of your body. It's the only place you have to live.” - Jim Rohn
Reading
You May Scoff…
 Before you read 
a. Do you think that ‘eating less and moving more’ can be a goo d suggestion for 
health?
Now read the following article about staying slim.
Who needs diets and exercise? There are plenty of other ways to stay slim. 
The holidays are a time of excess. Eat, drink and be merry, for  tomorrow we diet - or 
perhaps not! Unfortunately, we do not all have the self-discipl ine and determination 
it takes to cut back on cake and hit the gym. But fear not - th ere could be other ways 
to shift the fat and stay trim.
Just to get this straight, if you over-eat and under-
exercise you will gain weight. However, growing 
evidence suggests that other factors also contribute 
to excess adiposity. Last year, David Allison at 
the University of Alabama in Birmingham, Ala., 
highlighted this when he discovered that humans 
are not alone in piling on the pounds. He looked 
at wild animals, lab animals, even animals kept on 
the same highly controlled diets for decades, and 
found that all were becoming heavier ( Proceedings 
of the Royal Society B, vol. 279, p. 1626). Allison 
concludes that whatever factors are fattening up the 
animals that live around us might also help explain the human obesity epidemic.
That being the case, identifying these alternative factors should give us new ways to fight the
bulge. The good news is that researchers worldwide are beginning to do just that. It is 
not yet known how much each factor contributes to obesity, but we can nevertheless 
suggest ways of avoiding them – and some are far less painful than dieting or pounding 
the tarmac.


=== PAGE 61 ===

 English: Grade 11 54
Get vaccinated
If you catch a cold this holiday season, you may have to stock up on new clothes as well 
as tissues. That’s because at least one common cold virus has b een linked to obesity. 
Nikhil Dhurandhar of the Pennington Biomedical Research Centre in Louisiana 
discovered that adenovirus-36 (AD-36) boosts both the number of fat cells in the body 
and the amount of fat inside these cells. He also found that ob ese people are nearly 
three times as likely as those of healthy weight to test positi ve for AD-36 antibodies, 
indicating current or past infection (Obesity, vol. 14, p. 1905). Another study reported 
that children with AD-36 antibodies weighed an average of 23 ki lograms more than 
children without them (Paediatrics, vol. 126, p. 721).
The “fat effect "of AD-36 might persist for several years in humans, although 
nobody knows for sure. Meanwhile, another 10 microbes have been reported to make 
animals fatter. While it sounds alarming, this could actually be good news in the fight 
against flab. “If indeed some infections contribute to obesity in people, w e could 
have a potentially very simple and effective prevention strateg y – vaccination, “says 
Dhurandhar.
Chill! 
While extreme stress tends to make people lose weight, the everyday kind can have the 
opposite effect. So, for the sake of your waistline, take a deep breath, and don’t let the 
festive family bickering get to you.
Failing that, try giving the new-year diet a miss. One recent study found that moderate calorie
restriction made mice much more sensitive to stress, and this effect persis ted once 
the diet was over. The mice went on to choose more high-fat food than those that had 
never had their food restricted (Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 30, p. 16399).
Brain imaging studies by Rajita Sinha, director of the Yale Str ess Centre at Yale 
University showed that stress increases activity in the ventral  striatum, a region 
associated with reward and habits ( Neuropsychopharmacology, vol. 36, p. 627). “So 
it increases craving for high calorie foods in those who have a  habit of consuming 
them,” she says. Instead of counting calories, she recommends m indfulness, stress 
reduction and meditation techniques to cultivate an awareness o f how your thoughts 
and behaviour can undermine your health. “They can help with taking control over the 
urges and stress-related eating of high-calorie food”.
Everybody say “om”.

=== PAGE 62 ===

English: Grade 11 55
Over the past three decades, homes in the US and UK have become  warmer. Fiona 
Johnson at University College London and colleagues think this may be making us 
fatter (Obesity Review, vol. 12, p.543). Simona Bo of the University of Turin, Italy,  
agrees. In a study of more than 1500 middle-aged adults, her te am found that those 
whose home temperatures ranked in the top third were about twice as likely to become 
obese over the six-year period of the research ( International Journal of Obesity, vol. 
35, p.1442). 
Shivering obviously burns energy, but you don’t need to be freezing for your body to 
chew through extra calories. Most fat on our bodies is a type called white fat. But when 
temperatures get down to about 18°C, brown fat – which is abund ant in babies and 
which adults mostly carry around their necks – starts burning energy to warm you up.
Unfortunately, if you were not regularly exposed to cold, your brown fat deposits shrink 
and so too does your capacity to burn off that extra holiday treat. Any change will help, 
though, says Johnson. You burn steadily less energy as environm ental temperatures 
rise from 15°C to 28°C. “So turning down the thermostat by any amount is likely to 
have some small effect,” she says. Do try this at home.
Watch the packaging
As well as looking at the nutritional labeling, you might also want to watch the actual 
material your food comes wrapped in. Some plastic packaging and  cans contain 
endocrine disrupter chemicals that can leach into food and drin ks, and evidence is 
starting to link some of these to expanding waistlines. 
Endocrine disrupters change the 
normal functioning of hormones. 
Many interfere with the functioning of 
the thyroid, which produces hormones 
that regulate metabolic rate. One 
group, known as phthalates, also 
seems to activate a receptor in the 
cell nucleus called PPAR (peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor)-gamma, involved in storing fat 
and metabolizing glucose. In 2010, a team led by 
Elizabeth Hatch at Boston University reported that 
men with a bigger body mass index (BMI) and 
waist circumference had higher blood concentrations of metaboli tes of phthalate 


=== PAGE 63 ===

 English: Grade 11 56
(International Journal of Andrology, vol. 33, p.324). Other research has linked obesity 
to exposure to bisphenol A, which is another endocrine disrupter. 
Debate continues over whether these chemicals are harmful or not, and avoiding them 
is tricky. But look out for PVC packaging – labeled “Type 3” fo r recycling purpose 
– which can contain phthalates or bisphenol A. And be especiall y wary when buying 
fatty foods in which endocrine disrupters tend to accumulate, posing a potential double 
threat.
Turn down the lights
If your idea of a holiday workout is lifting glasses of beer la te into the night, then it’s 
not just the extra calories you need to worry about. Randy Nelson and his team at Ohio 
State University in Columbus found that mice exposed to light at night weighed 10 per 
cent more at the end of the eight-week study than mice that had experienced a standard 
light/dark cycle, even though they ate the same total number of  calories and did the 
same amount of exercise (Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 107, 
p.18664). Several other studies have found that shift work makes people fatter.
Light at night might alter circadian clock genes, changing an individual’s metabolism, 
Nelson suggests, “It’s difficult to specify an appropriate ligh t cycle for everyone,” 
he adds. But he recommends keeping a consistent pattern throughout the week and, 
if possible, avoiding blue wavelengths of light at night ( New Scientist, 7 May, p.44). 
Produced by many LED bulbs, these are known to be especially di sruptive to the 
circadian system. 
Move to the country
A brisk walk or jog outdoors can only help in the battle against the bulge, unless you are 
doing it in a busy city. Breathing polluted air can cause extra fat to accumulate around 
your stomach and also make your cells less sensitive to insulin, increasing your risk of 
developing type 2 diabetes. “We believe that air pollution plays a very important role 
in the current obesity epidemic,” says Xiaohua Xu of Ohio State University.
Xu exposed young mice to air heavily polluted with fine particl es for 6 hours a day, 
five days a week, and found that after 10 weeks they had about 50 per cent more 
abdominal fat than mice that were fed the same diet but inhaled filtered air. The fatter 
mice also had elevated blood levels of a protein involved in inflammation called 
tumour necrosis factor-alpha. Xu believes this may help explain  the changes to their 
fat cells, as well as their deceased sensitivity to insulin. 

=== PAGE 64 ===

English: Grade 11 57
Another study found a strong link between levels of fine partic ulate air pollution and 
the prevalence of type 2 diabetes in North Americans (Diabetes Care, vol. 33, p.2196). 
“We were shocked that the association held up as well as it did,” says John Pearson at 
Harvard University, who led the research. Fine particles can blow around the globe so 
you can never entirely escape them, even if you can afford to move out of the city. But 
if you have a choice, it still might be worth picking a rural ramble over an urban jog.
Have a lie-in 
If you need an excuse for spending more time in bed during the holidays, this could 
be it: too little sleep can make you fat. Simona Bo of the Univ ersity of Turin, Italy, 
found that the adults who became obese during her six-year stud y slept an average of 
about 6.3 hours a night, compared with about 7.2 hours for thos e who maintained a 
healthier body weight. The link between sleep and weight held e ven when her team 
took into account other important causes of obesity, such as lo w level of physical 
activity. Rachael Taylor at the University of Otago, New Zealan d, has found that 
children aged between 3 and 5 who sleep less than the average of 11 hours a night are 
also more likely to be overweight or obese by the time they are 7 years old. (BMJ, vol. 
342, p. 2712)
Sleep deprivation reduces the secretion of leptin, a hormone that suppresses appetite, 
and increases levels of ghrelin, a hormone that stimulates appe tite. “Or it could be as 
simple as less sleep means more time to eat”, says Taylor. Either way, an extra hour in 
bed sure beats going to the gym.
Emma Young
 Ways with words 
A. Ten words in the bold face in the text correspond to the def initions 
below. Match the definitions with the corresponding words.
a. in spite of what has just been said or referred to 
b. a strong desire or impulse 
c. the ability to continue trying to do something, although it is very difficult 
d. to attract attention to or emphasize something important
e. arguing about things that are not important 
f. not having things or conditions that are usually considered necessary 
g. continue to exist 

=== PAGE 65 ===

 English: Grade 11 58
h. soft loose flesh on a person's body  
i. to improve or increase something  
j. a limiting condition on something 
Now, make sentences of your own using the same words in bold type.
B. The words ‘restriction’ and ‘awareness’ are nouns with the s uffixes 
‘-ion’ and ‘-ness’.  Make a list of as many words as you can which end 
in ‘-ion’ and ‘-ness’.
C. Pronounce the words. The sound of the letter given on the le ft is silent.
a. b:  climb, dumb, doubt, comb, thumb, debt, lamb
b. d:  Wednesday, handsome, sandwich, handkerchief
c. h:  hour, honest, honour, heir, ghost, ghee, exhaust, exhibition
d. k:  know, knee, knowledge, knit, knife
e. n:  column, autumn, condemn, hymn, damn
f. p:  receipt, cupboard, pneumonia, psychology
 Comprehension 
A. Write whether the following statements are True, False or No t Given.
a. During the holidays people eat and drink more than usual.
b. Getting too little exercise and eating too much is the reaso n why people 
put on weight.
c. David Allison’s research involved studying rats under labora tory 
conditions.
d. You may need to go shopping for clothes if you come down wit h a cold.
e. Adenovirus-36 (AD-36) decreases the percentage of fat in the  fat cells.
f. Vaccination against infections could be used in the future t o prevent 
obesity.
g. People under severe stress can experience breathing difficul ties.
h. A study indicates that mice that have never been on a diet c hoose fatty food, 
when given a choice between high-calorie or low-calorie food products.
i. Rajita Sinha has been studying the connection between brain activity and 
behaviour.
j. Specific hormones regulate our appetite.

=== PAGE 66 ===

English: Grade 11 59
B. Answer the following questions.
a. In what sense are the holidays a time of excess? When can a person gain 
weight?
b. According to David Allison, which factor contributes to exce ss obesity?
c. What, according to Dhurandhar, can be the way of preventing fatness?
d. What is the relationship between chill and obesity? How can saying ‘om’ 
help reduce fatness?
e. Why is it necessary to be careful while buying plastic packa ged fatty 
foods?
f. Why does Nelson suggest avoiding blue wavelengths of light a t night?
g. How does breathing polluted air affect one’s fatness?
h. What is the link between sleep and weight?
 Critical thinking 
a. What do you do you to keep yourself fit? What food do you av oid and why?
b. Healthy citizens are the greatest asset of a country. What c an a state do to keep 
her citizen healthy? 
Writing
a. Yoga can be good to stay physically and mentally healthy. Do  you practise any 
yoga? Write an essay on the benefits of yoga. 
b. How can a person be mentally healthy? Provide about ten tips  to a person to stay 
mentally fresh and healthy.
Grammar
Concord/subject-verb agreement
Subject-verb agreement is the correspondence of a verb with its subject in person (first, 
second, or third) and number (singular or plural). 
A. Read this text and notice the subject-verb agreement.
The human body is like a machine. All machines need fuel to give them energy. 
The fuel for the human body is food. Most of the energy comes f rom two 
substances in our food: carbohydrates and fats. Carbohydrates are found in food 
like potatoes, bread, rice, wheat, corn, etc. and sugar. Fats c ome from food like 
meat, oil, cheese and butter. All junk food contains lots of ca rbohydrates and 

=== PAGE 67 ===

 English: Grade 11 60
fats. If you eat a lot of junk food, you will probably get fat and it may cause a 
lot of diseases.
B. Complete the sentences by choosing the correct verbs from th e 
brackets.
a. Everyone  ……  (has/have) problems in their life. Countries a lso ……
(has/have) problems, and so  ……  (do/does) the world. One of the greatest 
problems  ……  (is/are) the growing population. The population i n some 
countries  …… ( is/are) huge.
b. A number of my friends …… (love/loves) riding bicycles, but neither my 
brother nor my sister ……  (own/owns) a cycle. At 4 o’clock, eit her my 
mother or father …… (is/are) coming to pick me up in a car.
c. The pair of shoes on the floor …… (is/are) mine. The shoes … … (was/
were) made in China. The three thousand rupees I spent on them ……..
(was/were) worth it.
C. Are the following sentences correct? If not, correct them.
a. Every one of the workers receive the same benefits.
b. There is two gerbils in my bathroom.
c. Both of my friends live in Kathmandu.
d. Scissors is used to have our hair cut.
e. You and your friends are welcome to join us
f. Are the news on at five or six?
g. The man with all his children live in the city.
h. Mathematics are Prem's favourite subject, while Economics is  Alina's 
favourite subject.
Listening
A. Look at the picture and guess the answers to these questions .
a. Who are these people?
b. What is the man doing?

=== PAGE 68 ===

English: Grade 11 61
B. Listen to the recording and complete these sentences.
a. The man wants to try out for the company  …… team.
b. He was a  …… player during high school.
c. The woman suggested that her husband should cut back on the  …… foods.
d. She also suggests him trying …… to build up his cardiovascul ar system.
e. She wants to be …… the man for a long time.
C. Find information on recommended exercises for different age groups 
and people with certain health risks and discuss your findings with a 
partner. 
Speaking
Describing places
A. Work in pairs. Take turns to describe the village in the giv en picture. 
B. Describe a place that you have recently visited.
Project Work
“Eat Healthy Stay Healthy” is the slogan to keep oneself health y and active. Here 
are some sources of healthy food: BERRIES, FRUITS, VEGETABLES, GRAINS, 
LENTILS and NUTS. Research the benefits of these food items and  present them in 
class.


=== PAGE 69 ===

 English: Grade 11 62
Unit 7 Ecology and Development
“Sustainability is about ecology, economy and equity.” – Ralph Bicknese
Reading
Foresters without Diplomas
 Before you read 
a. What are the children doing in the picture? 
b. Share a couple of things that you and your friends 
have done to preserve or protect the environment in 
your community?
c. What does the title mean? Discuss with your friends.
Now read the following autobiographical essay about Maathai’s G reen Belt 
Campaign in Kenya.
The Green Belt Movement started in my backyard. I was involved in a political 
campaign with a man I was married to; I was trying to see what I could do for the 
people who were helping us during our campaign, people who came  from the poor 
communities. I decided to create jobs for them: cleaning their constituency, planting 
trees and shrubs, cleaning homes of the richer people in the communities, and getting 
paid for those services. That never worked, because poor people wanted support right 
away, and I didn’t have money to pay them before the people we were working for had 
paid me. So I dropped the project but stayed with the idea. The n, in 1976, two years 
after the first backyard idea, I was invited to join the Nation al Council of Women of 
Kenya.
We were into the UN’s “women’ decade”, and I got exposed to many of the problems 
women were facing: problems of firewood, malnutrition, lack of food and adequate 
water, unemployment, soil erosion. Quite often 
what we see in the streets of our cities, in the 
rural areas, in the slums, are manifestations 
of mistakes we make as we pretend we are 
“developing”, as we pursue what we are now 
calling maldevelopment.
And so we decided to go to the women. Why? 
Well, I am a woman. I was in a women’s 


=== PAGE 70 ===

English: Grade 11 63
organization. Women are the ones most affected by these problem s. Women are 
concerned about children, about the future.
So we went to the women and talked about planting trees and overcoming, for example, 
such problems as the lack of firewood and building and fencing materials, stopping 
soil erosion, protecting water systems. The women agreed, although they didn’t know 
how to do it.
The next few months we spent teaching them how to do it. We first called the foresters 
to come and show the women how you plant trees. The foresters p roved to be very 
complicated because they have diplomas; they have complicated ways of dealing with 
a very simple thing like looking for seeds and planting trees. So eventually we taught 
the women to just do it using common sense and they did. They were able to look for 
seeds in the neighborhood, and learn to recognize seedlings as they germinate when 
seeds fall on the ground. Women do not have to wait for anybody to grow trees. They 
are really foresters without a diploma. 
We started on World Environment Day, June 5, 1977; that’s when we planted the first 
seven trees. Now, only two are still standing. They are beautiful Nandi flame trees. The 
rest died. But by 1988, when we counted according to the record s women sent back 
to us, we had 10 million trees surviving. Many had already matured to be used by the 
women. But the most important thing is that the women were now independent; had 
acquired knowledge, techniques; had become empowered. They have  been teaching 
each other. We started with one tree nursery in the backyard of  the office of the 
National Council of Women. Today we have over 1,500 tree nurseries, 99 percent run 
by women.
The women get a very small payment for every seedling that surv ives. The few men 
who come are extremely poor, so poor that they don’t mind worki ng with women. 
Women do a lot of work that requires caring. And I don’t believ e that it is solely 
indoctrination. Women started the environmental movement, and now it has become a 
movement that even financial donors see they should put money in, because the efforts 
are providing results. But the minute money is in, the men come  in. I would not be 
surprised that eventually the more successful the Green Belt mo vement becomes, the 
more infiltrated it will be by men, who will be there more for the economic benefit 
than the commitment. 
Although men are not involved in the planting at the nursery, they are involved in the 
planting of trees on farms. These are small-scale farmers. In o ur part of Africa, men 

=== PAGE 71 ===

 English: Grade 11 64
own land; in some communities they own separate titles to the l and; in others there is 
still communal ownership, which is the tradition in Africa. We are most successful in 
communities where women are involved in land farming.
In Kenya, as in so much of the African continent, 80 percent of  the farmers and the 
fuel gatherers are women. Women also keep animals. A large popu lation of Kenyans 
are nomadic communities: the Maasai, the Samburu, the Somalis, most of the northern 
communities. We have been unsuccessful there. Yet this is where  trees are much 
needed. Areas that are green now will soon be a desert if not cared for.
We have been approached by other countries, and in 1987 - 88 we  launched what we 
hoped would become an effort to initiate Green Belt like activi ties in other African 
countries. Unfortunately, we have not been able to follow up. We started having our own 
problems in Kenya because of our having criticized the government for wanting to put 
up a big building in a Nairobi public park. But we are encouraging an establishment of 
a Green Belt Centre in Nairobi, where people can come and exper ience development 
that is community oriented, with community decision-making, and with development 
appropriate to the region.
Funding is always a problem. We never received any financial su pport from the 
Kenyan government. They gave us an office which they took away as soon as we 
criticized them. (In a way, it is good they didn’t give us money because they would have 
withdrawn that.) We receive much of our support from abroad, mo stly from women 
all over this world, who send us small cheques. And the United Nations Development 
Fund for Women gave us a big boost, $100,000 in 1981. We also received support from 
the Danish V oluntary Fund and the Norwegian Agency for International Development. 
In the US we are supported by the African Development Foundatio n, which helped 
us make a film about the Green Belt Movement in 1985. Informati on on the film can 
be obtained from the Public Affairs Officer of the African Deve lopment Foundation, 
1400 I Street, N.W., Washington D.C. 20005.
In the field, we now have about 750 people who teach new groups  and help with the 
compilation of the reports, which we monitor to have an idea of  what is happening in 
the field. At the headquarters, we now have about 40 people. When we were kicked out 
of our office, the headquarters moved back to my house; a full- circle return to where 
we started.
But it’s 10 million trees later – not quite where we started. F or myself, now that 
my two boys and a girl are big - the last boy is still in high school when we have 

=== PAGE 72 ===

English: Grade 11 65
trained enough women in leadership and fundraising, I would lov e to go back into an 
academic institution. I do miss it. My filed is biology. But I was into microanatomy 
and developmental anatomy. I would love to be able to read more  about community 
development and motivation and write about the experience that I have had in the field. 
And perhaps train people on grass-roots projects. But that will  have to wait. I earn 
maybe a tenth of what I could earn on the international market if I sold my expertise 
and energy, and I’m sure many people would probably consider me a fool. At home the 
men don’t believe that I don’t make a fortune out of the Green Belt Movement. But all 
over the world we women do this sort of thing.
My greatest satisfaction is to look back and see how far we hav e come. Something 
so simple but meaning so much, something nobody can take away f rom the people, 
something that is changing the face of the landscape.
But my greatest disappointment has been since I returned to Ken ya in 1966 after my 
education in the United States. When I was growing up and going  through school, I 
believe that the sky is the limit. I realized when I went home that the sky is not the 
limit, that human beings can make the limit for you, stop you from pursuing your full 
potential. I have had to fight to make a contribution. We lose so much from people 
because we don’t allow them to think freely and do what they ca n. So they lose their 
interest; their energy; the opportunity to be creative and posi tive. And developing 
countries need all the energy they can get.
I tell people that if they know how to read and write it is an advantage. But that all we 
really need is a desire to work and common sense. These are usually the last two things 
people are asked for. They are usually asked to use imposed kno wledge they do not 
relate to, so they become followers rather than leaders.
For example, because I criticized the political leadership, I h ave been portrayed as 
subversive, so it’s very difficult for me to not feel constrain ed. I have the energy; I 
want to do exactly what they spend hours in the UN talking abou t. But when you 
really want to do it you are not allowed, because the political system is not tolerant or 
encouraging enough.
But we must never lose hope. When any of us feels she has an idea or an opportunity, 
she should go ahead and do it. I never knew when I was working in my backyard that 
I was playing around with would one day become a whole movement. One person can 
make the difference.
Wangari Maathai

=== PAGE 73 ===

 English: Grade 11 66
 Ways with words 
A. Match the words with their meanings.
a. constituency i. seeking or intended to overthrow an establis hed system 
or institution
b. pursue ii. living the life of roaming
g. infiltrate iii. to follow in an effort to overtake or captur e
c. nomadic iv. electoral district
d. anatomy v. to enter or gain access to (an organization, plac e, etc.) 
secretly and gradually
e. subversive vi. art of studying the different parts of any or ganized body
B. Study the following words.
prefix words prefix words
mal maldevelopment, malpractice, 
malfunction
mis misbehave, misplace, misfortune
un unable, unhappy, unfair in inactive, incomplete, insufficient
pre prepaid, predetermine, preview il illegal, illegible, illitera te
dis disloyal, disobey, dishonest im impolite, immoral, impartial
re remix, repay, reuse ir irregular, irresponsible, irrelevant
de derail, depart, degrade non nonprofit, nonstop, nonsense
In the word ' maldevelopment' from the essay, the prefix 'mal-' makes its meaning 
negative which means 'faulty or imperfect development'. 
C. Make two other words by using each prefix given above and us e them 
in sentences.
 Comprehension 
Answer these questions.
a. What did Maathai decide to do for the community?
b. Mention the problems faced by women in Kenya.
c. Why did the speaker go to the women to talk about planting t rees?
d. What is the most important achievement of the movement descr ibed in the 
text?

=== PAGE 74 ===

English: Grade 11 67
e. Why were the foresters’ ways not helpful to the women for pl anting trees?
f. When and how did she start The Green Belt Movement?
g. Why do the donors want to provide money to the women?
h. What happened when the speaker criticized the political lead ership?
i. Mention the agencies that supported her movement?
 Critical thinking 
a. Do you think that the title “Foresters without Diplomas” is suitable to the essay? 
How?
b. Can a person make a difference in a society? Discuss with an  example from a 
person who has made a difference in your society. 
Writing
Personal letters
A. Study the given letter and underline sender's address, date,  greeting 
and complimentary close.
27 Barnes Avenue, London
March 1st, 2020
Dear Mrs. MacDonald,
As you know, we have been in the flat now for six months. We li ke it, but I'm afraid 
there are a few problems.
First, a good deal of the furniture is rather old. The armchairs, for example, are in bad 
condition and so is the big table where we eat. Could you please replace these items?
Secondly, the flat is extremely cold in winter. The central hea ting doesn't work very 
well and we have to use electric fires. And they are expensive,  of course. Part of the 
problem is the windows. They don't fit very well, so they let the wind in.
Finally, there's the kitchen. It really does need painting. We are quite prepared to do the 
work ourselves if you pay for the paint.
Can you possibly come and look at the flat yourself? I'm sure y ou will agree with us. 
In any case, please let us know about these things as soon as possible.
 Yours sincerely,
 Sandra Shaw

=== PAGE 75 ===

 English: Grade 11 68
B. Suppose you are MacDonald. Write a reply to Sandra Shaw . 
C. Write an essay on 'The Community Forest in Nepal'. Describe how 
these community forests have contributed to maintain ecology in  our 
environment.
Grammar
Transitive, intransitive and linking verbs
A. Study the examples.
A couple bought a couple of tickets for their honeymoon.
The car stopped suddenly.
All the children seem satisfied with their exam result.
Here bought is a transitive verb, stopped an intransitive verb and seem a linking verb.
B. What is the difference among transitive, intransitive and li nking 
verbs? Give examples of each.
C. Underline the verb in each sentence and write whether it is transitive, 
intransitive or linking.
a. His father looks handsome. b. Bhawana drinks milk every day.
c. He became a watchman. d. This bread smells good.
e. The dog barked loudly. f. He chased the dog.
g. My sister swims fast. h. He painted a picture.
i. Radhika always asks questions. j. Anjana has a long hair.
Listening
A. Look at the picture and answer these questions.
a. What are they talking about? 
b. What types of television programmes you prefer? 
c. What do you know about the climate change?
d. What are the reasons of the climate change?

=== PAGE 76 ===

English: Grade 11 69
B. Listen to an interview about environmental governance and s tate 
whether the following statements are true or false.
a. Maria Ivanova is a professor of the 
University of Massachusetts. 
b. Environmental governance is the design 
and execution of the policy related to the 
environment.  
c. For Maria, the climate change is a separate 
issue.
d. There is a nexus among the various organizations and institu tions.
e. The issues of climate change should be brought down to the c lassrooms.
C. Answer the following questions.
a. What is Maria Ivanova's working field?
b. What is the global problem for today, according to Maria?
c. What is Maria's dissatisfaction about the efforts towards th e environmental 
issues?
d. What is the best way forward to address the governance and t he climate 
change issues?
D. Maria Ivanova is advocating for the education of the environ mental 
issues.  Why is she doing this? Talk to your classmates.
Speaking
Asking about opinions/giving opinions
A. Read the expressions for asking about and giving opinions.
Asking about opinions Giving opinions
What do you think?
 What’s your view?
 How do you see the situation?
 What’s your opinion?
Do you think (that)…?
Would you agree with me that…?
Don’t you think (that)…?
I think/reckon…
In my opinion/In my view…
I feel that…
As far as I’m concerned…
From my point of view…
Well, I reckon (that)…
I believe (that)…
Personally speaking, I believe/think…
As for me, I reckon…


=== PAGE 77 ===

 English: Grade 11 70
B. Work in pairs. Ask about and give opinions using different e xpressions 
on the following topics.
Example: A: What do you think about politics?
 B: As for me, I think politics is the policy of the policies.
a. educating girls f. learning English
b. following foreign traditions g. speaking several languages
c. worshipping god h. engaging in corruption
d. depending on foreign aid i. brain drain
e. cheating in exams j. being drunkards
Project Work
a. Imagine that you are a chief guest of the programme organize d by a local 
government on the occasion of The Environment Day. Write a 10-minute speech 
and deliver it to the class.
b. Identify a person from your community who has worked on envi ronmental 
protection. Write a story of that person incorporating the effo rts s/he made to 
change things and attitudes of people. 

=== PAGE 78 ===

English: Grade 11 71
Unit 8 Humour and Satire
“Remember, today is the tomorrow you worried about yesterday.” - Dale Carnegie
Reading
A Few Kind Words for Superstition
 Before you read 
a. What do you see in the picture? What's your 
quick response to this situation?
b. What is superstition? Do you think luck has 
a role in your life?
Now read the following article about superstition.
In grave discussions of “the renaissance of the irrational” in our time, superstition 
does not figure largely as a serious 
challenge to reason or science. 
Parapsychology, UFOs, miracle 
cures, transcendental meditation, 
and all the paths to instant 
enlightenment are condemned, but 
superstition is merely deplored. Is it 
because it has an unacknowledged 
hold on so many of us?
Few people will admit to being 
superstitious; it implies naiveté or ignorance. But I live in t he middle of a large 
university, and I see superstition in its four manifestations, alive and flourishing among 
people who are indisputably rational and learned.
You did not know that superstition takes four forms? Theologian s assure us that it 
does. First is what they call Vain Observances, such as not wal king under a ladder, 
and that kind of thing. Yet I saw a deeply learned professor of anthropology, who had 
spilled some salt, throwing a pinch of it over his left shoulder; when I asked him why, 
he replied, with a wink, that it was “to hit the Devil in the eye.” I did not question him 
further about his belief in the Devil: But I noticed that he di d not smile until I asked 
him what he was doing.


=== PAGE 79 ===

 English: Grade 11 72
The second form is Divination, or consulting oracles. Another l earned professor I 
know, who would scorn to settle a problem by tossing a coin (which is a humble appeal 
to Fate to declare itself), told me quite seriously that he has  resolved a matter related 
to university affairs by consulting the I Ching. And why not? There are thousands of 
people on this continent who appeal to the I Ching, and their general level of education 
seems to absolve them of superstition. Almost, but not quite. T he I Ching, to the 
embarrassment of rationalists, often gives excellent advice.
The third form is Idolatry, and universities can show plenty of  that. If you have ever 
supervised a large examination room, you know how many jujus, l ucky coins, and 
other bringers of luck are placed on the desks of the candidate s. Modest idolatry, but 
what else can you call it?
The fourth form is Improper Worship of the True God. A while ag o, I learned that 
every day, for several days, a $2 bill (in Canada we have $2 bi lls, regarded by some 
people as unlucky) had been tucked under a candlestick on the altar of a college chapel. 
Investigation revealed that an engineering student, worried abo ut a girl, thought that 
bribery of the Deity might help. When I talked with him, he did not think he was pricing 
God cheap because he could afford no more. A reasonable argument, but perhaps God 
was proud that week, for the scientific oracle went against him.
Superstition seems to run, a submerged river of crude religion,  below the surface of 
human consciousness. It has done so for as long as we have any chronicle of human 
behaviour, and although I cannot prove it, I doubt if it is mor e prevalent today than it 
has always been. Superstition, the theologians tell us, comes from the Latin supersisto, 
meaning to stand in terror of the Deity. Most people keep their  terror within bounds, 
but they cannot root it out, nor do they seem to want to do so.
The more the teaching of formal religion declines, or takes a s ociological form, the 
less God appears to great numbers of people as a God of Love, r esuming his older 
form of a watchful, minatory power, to be placated and cajoled. Superstition makes its 
appearance, apparently unbidden, very early in life, when child ren fear that stepping 
on cracks in the sidewalk will bring ill fortune. It may persis t even among the greatly 
learned and devout, as in the case of Dr. Samuel Johnson, who f elt it necessary to 
touch posts that he passed in the street. The psychoanalysts have their explanation, but 
calling a superstition a compulsion neurosis does not banish it.
Many superstitions are so widespread and so old that they must have risen from a depth 
of the human mind that is indifferent to race or creed. Orthodo x Jews place a charm 

=== PAGE 80 ===

English: Grade 11 73
on their doorposts; so do (or did) the Chinese. Some peoples of Middle Europe believe 
that when a man sneezes, his soul, for that moment, is absent from his body, and they 
hasten to bless him, lest the soul be seized by the Devil. How did the Melanesians 
come by the same idea? Superstition seems to have a link with some body of belief that 
far antedates the religions we know religions which have no place for such comforting 
little ceremonies and charities.
People who like disagreeable historical ceremonies recall that when Rome was 
in decline, superstition proliferated wildly, and that somethin g of the same sort is 
happening in our Western world today. They point to the popularity of astrology, and it 
is true that sober newspapers that would scorn to deal in love philters carry astrology 
columns and the fashion magazines count them among their most p opular features. 
But when has astrology not been popular? No use saying science discredits it. When 
has the heart of man given a damn for science?
Superstition in general is linked to man’s yearning to know his fate, and to have some 
hand in deciding it. When my mother was a child, she innocently  joined her Roman 
Catholic friends in killing spiders on July 11, until she learn ed that this was done to 
ensure heavy rain the day following, the anniversary of the Battle of Boyne, when the 
Orangemen would hold their parade. I knew an Italian, a good scientist, who watched 
every morning before leaving his house, so that the first person he met would not be a 
priest or a nun, as this would certainly bring bad luck.
I am not one to stand aloof from the rest of humanity in this m atter, for when I was a 
university student, a gypsy woman with a child in her arms used to appear every year 
at examination time, and ask a shilling of anyone who touched t he Lucky Baby; that 
swarthy infant cost me four shillings altogether, and I never failed an examination. Of 
course, I did it merely for the joke or so I thought then. Now, I am humbler.
Robertson Davies
NOTES
UFO (unidentified flying object): any unusual apparent object in the sky whose cause 
cannot be identified by the observer; it more loosely refers to alien spacecraft.
I Ching  (known as Yi Jing): an ancient Chinese oracle based on a 3000- year-old 
manuscript of Chinese wisdom called The Book of Changes with in terpretations 
inspired by the elements of nature
Gypsy: a member of a tribe with dark skin and hair speaking Romany and originally from 

=== PAGE 81 ===

 English: Grade 11 74
northern India who typically used to travel from place to place, and now live especially in 
Europe and North America
 Ways with words 
A. Match the following.
a. transcendental i. to feel or express strong disapproval of ( something)
b. deplore ii. a charm or fetish used by some West African 
peoples
c. absolve iii. natural state
d. juju iv. spiritual, nonphysical or mystical
e. crude v. a  written record of historical events 
f. chronicle vi. set free from blame, guilt, or responsibility;  release
B. Find the contextual meanings of the following words from the  text and 
then use them in sentences of your own.
condemn, terror, unbidden, persist, devout, banish, creed, hast en, sober, scorn, 
yearning, aloof, swarthy, humbler
C. One of the ways to understand words and their meanings is to  learn the 
origin of the word. For example, the word 'expand', which means  'to 
spread out or extend', comes from Middle English expanden, derived 
from the Latin word expandere: ex-(out)+ pandere (to spread). Trace 
the origins of each of the following words finding such explanations in 
a dictionary or the Internet. Then make sentences by using each word.
minatory, placated, cajoled, antedates, proliferated, philter
C. List any five words found in an English dictionary beginning  with the 
prefix 'super-.' What common meaning do all of these words shar e? 
How do the words in your list change meaning if you eliminate t he 
prefix?
 Comprehension 
Answer these questions.
a. According to the author, what are the four types of supersti tion? 
b. Which language is the word 'superstition' derived from? What  does it mean?

=== PAGE 82 ===

English: Grade 11 75
c. How do psychologists understand superstition?
d. How does superstition differ from religion? 
e. What is the belief of some people in the Middle Europe about  sneezing?
f. In the author’s view, why are people so fascinated about sup erstition?
 Critical thinking 
a. What is the key takeaway of this essay? Do you think that th is essay is satirical? 
Why?
b. Can education bring change in the belief of superstition? Pr esent your arguments 
to support your answer.
Writing
a. Write an essay on superstitions that exists in your communit y in about 250 
words.
b. “Superstition is prevalent in every walk of life.'' Argue fo r or against this 
statement.
Grammar
Present simple or present continuous/progressive
A. Study the following examples of present simple and present continuous.
Present simple Present continuous
a. Water boils at100º Celsius. a.  The water is boiling. Can you turn it off?
b. Jenisha lives in Jumla. b.  Jenisha is living in Tokyo for a few 
months.
c. I drink coffee every morning. c.  I am drinking too much coffee these days 
because I’m so busy at work.
d.
 He always tells lies. d.  You are always telling lies.
e. My plane leaves at six this 
evening.
e. I'm leaving for Pokhara tomorrow.
f.
 I know her very well. f. I am reading a novel by Paulo Coelho.
g. At the end of the story, the 
protagonist catches the killer.
g. In this photo, my mother is wearing a blue 
sari.

=== PAGE 83 ===

 English: Grade 11 76
B. Put the verb into the correct form, present simple or present continuous.
a. Nisha  …… (speak) English very well.
b. Hurry up! We …… (wait) for you.
c. Excuse me! …… (you/speak) English?
d. She …… (have) a shower in bathroom.
e. How often …… (you/read) a newspaper?
f. I'm sorry, I …… (not/understand). Can you speak more slowly?
g. You can turn off the radio. I …… (not/listen) to it.
h. I usually …… (get up) at 5 o'clock every morning.
i. Look! The river …… (flow) very fast.
j. Amrita …… (not/seem) very happy at the moment.
C. Are the underlined verbs in the correct form? Correct them w here 
necessary.
a. Water boils at 100° C.  
b. The water boils. Can you turn it off?
c. I must go now. It gets late.
d. This sauce's tasting really good. 
e. I’m thinking this is your key. 
f. Are you believing in God? 
g. I usually go to school on foot.
h. Look! That man tries to open the door of her car. 
i. The moon is going round the earth.
j. I'm getting hungry. Let's go and eat. 
Listening
A. Look at this picture and answer these questions.
a. What do you see in the picture? Name them.
b. When do you need them?
c. Why do you need them?
d. Do you have these things at your home?
B. Listen to the recording and choose the correct alternative.
a. Which of the following did the man mention as an emergency?
 i. Tornado  ii. Power failure iii. Tsunami


=== PAGE 84 ===

English: Grade 11 77
b. Why do you need a water filter?
 i. Bacteria in water can cause serious illness.
 ii. Having a water filter helps you store your water.
 iii. The source of water can be infested.
c. What type of food does the man want to keep in the kits?
 i. food that requires preparation ii. canned food
 iii. light and handy food
d. According to Lisa, what is her image of an emergency shelter ?
 i. A place that lacks adequate food and water
 ii. Where people work together under difficult conditions
 iii. A place that is very overcrowded and dirty
e. How can we communicate with family members in an emergency?
 i. Depend on cell phones. ii. Use fire. iii. Use two-way radio s.
f. What should the people with small children do?
 i. Pack plenty of chocolates. ii. Carry their favourite toys.
 iii. Be prepared with basic art supplies.
C. Did you find this recording useful for you? Present your log ics for or 
against the topic.
Speaking
Suggesting and advising
A. Look at the following conversations and act out.
You should go 
to the dentist.
I've got a 
toothache. What 
should I do?
Shall I take 
an umbrella?
Yes, you'd better. 
It might rain.

=== PAGE 85 ===

 English: Grade 11 78
B. Study these expressions of giving advice.
a. You should stay at home.
b. Why don’t you stay in bed?
c. You ought to put on your glasses.
d. You’d better invite her to your birthday party.
e. If I were you, I’d ask her.
f. It’d be a good idea to use a pencil.
C. What would you suggest to your friends in the following situ ations?
a. Your friend lost his/her pen.
b. Ramila is weak in Mathematics.
c. Pardip has a headache.
d. Your friend is getting fat.
e. Mukesh wants to dance but he can't.
D. What would you advise to Muna in the following situations?
Example: Muna: I'm sleepy.
You : You should/ought to drink a cup of tea.
a. I'm hungry. b. I'm cold. 
c. I can't control my temper. d. I have hiccups. 
e. I can't get to sleep at night.
Project Work
Interview some people in your locality. Ask them what kind of superstitions they grew 
up with. Ask everyone whether they believe in those superstitio ns at present or not. 
Prepare a news article including their responses.

=== PAGE 86 ===

English: Grade 11 79
Unit 9 Democracy and Human Rights
"No one is born hating another person because of the colour of his skin or his 
background or his religion. People must learn to hate, and if t hey can learn to hate, 
they can be taught to love, for love comes more naturally to th e human heart than its 
opposite." -Nelson Mandela
Reading
Inauguration Speech of Nelson Mandela
 Before You Read 
a. Work in pairs. Look at the photos and share what you know ab out them.
b. What do these individuals share in common?
Now, read a short biography of Nelson Mandela and his Inauguration Speech.
Nelson Mandela, in full Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela, byname Madiba, (born July 18, 
1918 — died December 5, 2013), was a black nationalist and the first black president of 
South Africa (1994–99). He fought against apartheid, a policy that governed relations 
between South Africa’s white minority and nonwhite majority and  sanctioned racial 
segregation and political and economic discrimination against nonwhites.
He sacrificed his private life and his youth for his people. He spent 27 years in prison 
for his protests and became the world's most famous political prisoner. He continued to 
fight until peace, justice and stability was established in the country. Later, he became 
the first Black President of South Africa through the democrati c election. Nelson 
Mandela was born in Transkei, South Africa. He was a member of the Thembu tribe, 
and his father was the chief of the Thembu people. He got a good modern education.
When he was sixteen, he was sent to a boarding school.  He attended South African 

=== PAGE 87 ===

 English: Grade 11 80
Native College (later the University of Fort Hare) and studied law at the University 
of the Witwatersrand; he later passed the qualification exam to  become a lawyer. 
In 1944, he joined the African National Congress (ANC) and cont inued to oppose 
the apartheid policies of the ruling National Party. Nelson and the other ANC leaders 
organized strikes and several other protests. Mandela was charged with organizing an 
armed wing of the ANC, and was arrested in 1962. As a result, he was sentenced to life 
imprisonment.
Nelson Mandela was the most famous prisoner in the world for hi s anti-apartheid 
movement. He refused to compromise his political position to ob tain his personal 
freedom from the prison. He wanted all people of all races to h ave equal rights in 
South Africa. 'Free Mandela' became a rallying cry throughout the world.
After a long campaign of resistance within South Africa and the international pressure, 
President F.W. de Klerk released Mandela from prison in 1990, a fter 27 years. After 
his release, Mandela continued his campaign to end apartheid, a nd establish justice 
and peace in South Africa. As a result, Mandela was awarded the  Nobel Peace Prize 
in 1993. 
One year later in April 1994, a national election was held, and  that was open to all 
South Africans. Nelson Mandela, who represented the ANC, won th e election and 
became the first Black President of South Africa. The inaugurat ion of South Africa's 
first Black President was attended by politicians and dignitari es from more than 140 
countries around the world.
Here is the Inaugural Speech delivered by Nelson Mandela in Pretoria, the capital 
of South Africa, on May 10, 1994:
Your Majesties, Your Royal Highnesses, 
Distinguished Guests, Comrades and Friends!
Today, all of us do, by our presence here, and by 
our celebrations in other parts of our country and the 
world, confer glory and hope to newborn liberty.
Out of the experience of an extraordinary human disaster that lasted too long, must be 
born a society of which all humanity will be proud. 
Our daily deeds as ordinary South Africans must produce an actu al South African 
reality that will reinforce humanity’s belief in justice, strengthen its confidence in the 
nobility of the human soul and sustain all our hopes for a glorious life for all.


=== PAGE 88 ===

English: Grade 11 81
All this we owe both to ourselves and to the people of the worl d who are so well 
represented here today.
To my compatriots, I have no hesitation in saying that each one  of us is as intimately 
attached to the soil of this beautiful country as are the famous jacaranda trees of Pretoria 
and the mimosa trees of the bushveld.
Each time one of us touches the soil of this land, we feel a se nse of personal renewal. 
The national mood changes as the seasons change.
We are moved by a sense of joy and exhilaration when the grass turns green and the 
flowers bloom.
That spiritual and physical oneness we all share with this common homeland explains 
the depth of the pain we all carried in our hearts as we saw our country tear itself apart 
in a terrible conflict, and as we saw it spurned, outlawed and isolated by the people 
of the world, precisely because it has become the universal bas e of the pernicious 
ideology and practice of racism and racial oppression.
We, the people of South Africa, feel fulfilled that humanity has taken us back into its 
bosom, that we, who were outlaws not so long ago, have today be en given the rare 
privilege to be host to the nations of the world on our own soil.
We thank all our distinguished international guests for having come to take possession 
with the people of our country of what is, after all, a common victory for justice, for 
peace, for human dignity.
We trust that you will continue to stand by us as we tackle the  challenges of building 
peace, prosperity, non-sexism, non-racialism and democracy.
We deeply appreciate the role that the masses of our people and  their political mass 
democratic, religious, women, youth, business, traditional and other leaders have 
played to bring about this conclusion. Not least among them is my Second Deputy 
President, the Honourable F.W. de Klerk.
We would also like to pay tribute to our security forces, in al l their ranks, for the 
distinguished role they have played in securing our first democ ratic elections and the 
transition to democracy, from blood-thirsty forces which still refuse to see the light.
The time for the healing of the wounds has come.
The moment to bridge the chasms that divide us has come.
The time to build is upon us.

=== PAGE 89 ===

 English: Grade 11 82
We have, at last, achieved our political emancipation. We pledge ourselves to liberate 
all our people from the continuing bondage of poverty, deprivation, suffering, gender 
and other discrimination.
We succeeded to take our last steps to freedom in conditions of  relative peace. We 
commit ourselves to the construction of a complete, just and lasting peace. 
We have triumphed in the effort to implant hope in the breasts of the millions of our 
people. We enter into a covenant that we shall build the societ y in which all South 
Africans, both black and white, will be able to walk tall, with out any fear in their 
hearts, assured of their inalienable right to human dignity - a  rainbow nation at peace 
with itself and the world.
As a token of its commitment to the renewal of our country, the new Interim Government 
of National Unity will, as a matter of urgency, address the issue of amnesty for various 
categories of our people who are currently serving terms of imprisonment.
We dedicate this day to all the heroes and heroines in this cou ntry and the rest of the 
world who sacrificed in many ways and surrendered their lives s o that we could be 
free.
Their dreams have become reality. Freedom is their reward.
We are both humbled and elevated by the honour and privilege th at you, the people 
of South Africa, have bestowed on us, as the first President of  a united, democratic, 
nonracial and non-sexist South Africa, to lead our country out of the valley of darkness.
We understand it still that there is no easy road to freedom.
We know it well that none of us acting alone can achieve success.
We must therefore act together as a united people, for national reconciliation, for nation 
building, for the birth of a new world.
Let there be justice for all.
Let there be peace for all.
Let there be work, bread, water and salt for all.
Let each know that for each the body, the mind and the soul have been freed to fulfill 
themselves.
Never, never and never again shall it be that this beautiful land will again experience the 
oppression of one by another and suffer the indignity of being the skunk of the world.

=== PAGE 90 ===

English: Grade 11 83
Let freedom reign.
The sun shall never set on so glorious a human achievement!
God bless Africa!
Thank you.
 Ways with words 
A. Find the words in the text that mean the same as the followi ng. The 
first letters are given.
a. the system that completely separated black people from white  people
  (a…………….)
b. formal objection (p………....….)
c. an ethnical group of people (t…..…..……..)
d. an act undertaken to achieve a set goal (c……………..)
e. the formal beginning of any movement (i………….…..)
f. a strong feeling of excitement and happiness (e……………..)
g. being set free from legal, social, or political restrictions  (e…….……….)
B. Find these words in a dictionary and write their meanings as  they are 
used in the text.
liberty, conflict, ideology, oppression, privilege, dignity, surrender, reconciliation
C. The 'd' or 'ed' in the following verbs have different pronun ciation. Put 
these verbs in the correct box.
asked killed missed ended decided washed visited
lasted watched picked smiled fi  xed walked blessed
brushed stopped wanted reached laughed enjoyed 
/t/ /d/ /ɪd/

=== PAGE 91 ===

 English: Grade 11 84
D. Put these nouns into the correct box according to the pronun ciation of 
the plural suffix: s/es.
cats    dogs    horses    houses    books    roofs    boys    rooms   girls     noises    
shops    trees     pages    babies   benches   classes  
/s/ /z/ /ɪz/
 Comprehension 
Answer these questions.
a. What were the restrictions imposed on the Blacks in South Af rica?
b. Why was Mandela arrested? 
c. How did he describe racism and racial oppression?
d. Why did he thank all the international guests?
e. Why did he think that people in his country had achieved pol itical 
emancipation?
f. What is the main point of Mandela’s speech?
 Critical thinking  
a. What does Mandela mean when he says - a rainbow nation at pe ace with itself 
and the world?
b. Mandela should have avenged on those who imprisoned him for such a long 
period. Instead, he followed the path of reconciliation. Why do you think he did 
so?
c. Why and how have societies struggled with segregation in the  world? Do you 
find any evidence of segregation in your society? Discuss.
Writing
a. Nepal has topsy-turvy political history. Many changes have b een observed 
in different times. Write a short biography of any Nepali freed om fighter 
incorporating the changes brought under his/her leadership.  
b. Do you think there is racial/caste related discrimination in  our country? Discuss 
with your friend; write a five-minute speech. 

=== PAGE 92 ===

English: Grade 11 85
Grammar
Should and had better
A. Look at these examples.
B. Complete the sentences with should o r  shouldn't. Use one of these 
verbs.
drink     visit    leave           roam              quit
a. You have really done a wonderful job. I recommend you …… it.
b. That's a very dangerous area. Tourists …… there.
c. I'm going to be late. Do you think I …… now?
d. Children …… sugary drinks. It's not very healthy.
e. I have lots of homework. I …… here and there today.
C. Put in had better or should.
a. I think you …… learn English to enroll a university course. 
b. It's a great film. You …… go and see it.
c. I have to meet my friend in ten minutes. I …… go now or I'll  be late.
d. These biscuits are delicious. You …… try one.
e. We …… get to the airport by 2 pm or else we may miss the fli ght.
f. When people are driving, they …… keep their eyes on the road .
g. I …… get up early tomorrow. I've got a lot to do.
It might rain. You’d 
better take an 
umbrella.
You look tired. 
You should go 
to bed.


=== PAGE 93 ===

 English: Grade 11 86
Listening
A. Look at the picture and answers these questions. 
a. Who are these people?
b. What slogans are they chanting?
c. Have you ever seen such rally at 
your surroundings?
B. Listen to the recording and fill 
in the blanks with the correct 
words.
a. Richard Cookson is competing for the post of …… for National  Congress Party. 
b. The National Congress Party is going to spend …… more on edu cation than the 
ruling party.
c. The NCP is going to …… to curb the issues of global warming.  
d. The Social Democratic Party is going to …… the communities.  
e. On average, …… tax will be added but the wealthier people wi ll have to pay 
more. 
f. The NCP is supposed to top the election by …… per cent.   
C. If you are supposed to vote in an election, how do you selec t a good 
candidate? List out some of the criteria. 
Speaking
Persuading
A. Look at the following illustration. 
I can't…Come on Arun!

=== PAGE 94 ===

English: Grade 11 87
B. Now, look at some common expressions used for persuasion. 
Come on……! Just for me!
Give it a try! Just this once!
Why don’t you…?  Please!
Go ahead, Bina! Do…
Try it! Go on!
C. Read and act out the following dialogue. 
Mother : Your sister’s doing her homework. Why don’t you help h er?
Son : Ah, mom, I’m a little bit tired right now.
Mother : Go on. She may make mistakes.
Son : She’s probably finished her homework by now.
Mother : No, she hasn’t. She’s just started. Go ahead. Help her .
Son : Oh, OK, mom.
D. What would you say in the following situations?
a. You’re with your friend in a shopping mall. Your friend want s to buy a new 
jacket. You see a nice one and want to persuade her/him to buy it.
b. You’re in a restaurant for lunch. You urge your friend to tr y some food of 
your choice.
Project Work
Develop a set of questionnaire to ask people what the community  issues are and how 
they expect the local government to address them. Include about  15 questions in the 
questionnaire. Visit the people in the community, collect the r esponse, assemble the 
information and prepare a brief report. Present a brief version  of the report in your 
class. 

=== PAGE 95 ===

 English: Grade 11 88
Unit 10 Home Life and Family Relationship
“What can you do to promote world peace? Go home and love your family.” – Mother 
Teresa
Reading
The Tattered Blanket
 Before You Read 
Look at these pictures and discuss the questions with your friends.
 Picture A Picture B
a. What is happening in the first picture? What does it indicat e?
b. What do you think is the elderly woman in the second picture  doing? Does she 
look happy?   Why/why not?
Now read the following story.
When he arrived unexpectedly at his home in the countryside in his office jeep and 
got down at the gate, his mother, 
who was lying in an armchair on the 
veranda, made a futile attempt to get 
up.
‘Kamalam, there is somebody at the 
gate,’ she said, ‘somebody in a car.’
Kamalam, her eldest daughter, a 
widow, who was sitting huddled up 
on the thinna on the veranda, her 
head and ears covered with a thin 


=== PAGE 96 ===

English: Grade 11 89
bath towel, got up reluctantly, walked slowly to the gate and s crewing up her eyes 
peered into the darkness.
She saw a bald, fat, middle-aged man walking in through the gate.
‘Oh, Gopi!’ She said in her grating voice. ‘Why this sudden unexpected visit?’
‘Kamalam, who is it?’ Her mother asked loudly from the veranda.
‘Gopi,’ the man said. 'There was a meeting in Thiruvananthapura m. I just dropped in 
on my way back.’
‘Who? Kamalam, who is it?' There was a note of alarm in Amma’s voice.
‘Amma, why are you so scared?’ Kamalam, Gopi’s eldest sister, a sked her a little 
awkwardly. ‘As if you are seeing Gopi for the first time!’
‘Amma, it’s me, Gopi,’ he said again.
He bent down and brought his face close to her wrinkled cheeks. ‘Amma, it’s me.’
'Gopi? Kamalam, I can’t believe it! Has his school closed for the vacation?’
‘Amma is often like this these days. She doesn’t recognise anyb ody.’ Gopi’s sister 
explained. ‘But sometimes her memory is quite sharp. Then she a sks me if you have 
sent any letter. I tell her everything is fine with you, Vimala and the kids. What is the 
point of telling her that you haven’t written for a year? Poor thing! I wouldn’t dream 
of making her unhappy.’
‘I got a promotion last year. After that, I am always on my toe s. And there are tours 
quite often. I don’t get any time to write letters.’
‘Why don’t you ask Vimala to write, or doesn't she get any time, either?'
‘What are you mumbling over there?’ Amma said loudly. ‘I heard somebody coming 
in a car. Who is it?’ 
‘I told you, it’s Gopi.’
‘But Gopi is in Delhi, isn’t he?’
‘Yes, Amma, it’s me. I’ve come from Delhi.’
‘Who did Gopi marry?’ Amma said, suddenly lowering her voice. ‘I mean, what’s his 
wife’s name?’
‘Don’t say you’ve forgotten her name too. Don’t you remember, V imala, District 

=== PAGE 97 ===

 English: Grade 11 90
Collector Nambiar’s eldest daughter?’ Gopi’s sister said.
‘Oh, I forgot the name. Was there a letter from Gopi today?’
‘There was. He writes every day.’
‘I’m terribly upset if I don’t get a letter from him every day.’
‘He knows it. That’s why he writes every day.’
‘Look at the way she talks.’ Gopi’s sister turned to him. ‘Just as I told you. You know 
nothing about what’s going on here, do you?’
‘Who is that?’ Amma said again. ‘Who is that in a car?’
‘It’s me,’ Gopi said. ‘I had to come to Thiruvananthapuram. I thought I should drop in 
to see you, Amma.’
‘Who is your Amma? What is her name? Where does she live? Is it far from here?’
‘No, it is quite near.’
‘I don’t know how I can bring back her memory,’ Gopi’s sister said to him exasperatedly.
Gopi placed his briefcase on the thinna. He opened it and pulle d out the contents. 
Clothes, files, a shaving set …
‘Do you know my son, Gopi?’ Amma asked him. ‘He is in Delhi... a Government 
Officer. He has well-settled .... He draws a salary of two thousand five hundred rupees. 
Do you know him?’
‘Yes, I know him.’
‘Tell him to send me a blanket. There is a cold mist in the mornings. If I catch a cold, 
it doesn’t leave me for a long time. Tell him to send a blanket , won’t you? A red one. 
I had a blanket, the one he bought for me when he was studying in Madras. It is all 
tattered now, just a ball of knotted yarn. Tell him to send me a red blanket, will you?’
‘I’ll tell him,’ he nodded.
‘Please don’t forget to tell him. The mist is not good for me. I think I’ll stretch myself 
out for a bit. I have been sitting too long in the armchair. I have a pain in the neck.’
Gopi’s sister put Amma to bed and came back to the veranda.
‘You didn’t come to see Amma, did you?’
‘Delhi is too expensive. You know I have four children to look after now. I can’t make 

=== PAGE 98 ===

English: Grade 11 91
ends meet with my salary. And one has to keep up one’s status. It will be a great help 
if I can raise some money by selling my share of the family property. I came to talk it 
over with you.’
‘You’ll sell your land and go away with the money. I know you w on’t come here 
anymore after that.’
‘Don’t say that. I’ll come when I get time.’
‘Your time!’
He saw the irritation on his sister’s face.
‘It took you more than five years to find time to come here. Amma is eighty-three now. 
I don’t think she will pull on much longer. It took you so long to visit her after the last 
time.’
‘But Amma can’t remember who I am,’ he said smiling feebly.
‘But do you remember your Amma?’
Kamala Das (Translated from Malayalam by K. M. Sherrif)
 Ways with words 
A. Fill in the blanks with an appropriate word from the box.
irritation   huddled up   awkwardly    futile    grating   mumbling    feebly
a. All my efforts to convince her for the tour were …… .
b. The lost traveller …… under a shelter made of branches and l eaves.
c. Her rude behaviour was the main cause of …… for him.
d. She moved …… in the room, thinking that I was watching.
e. She is …… something, but I can’t hear her.
f. When I met my sister after a long time, she talked to me in a …… voice.
B. Tick (√) the correct words that are similar in meaning to the underlined 
words.
a. Rupa studied Science reluctantly due to her father’s pressur e.
i. eagerly ii. unwillingly iii. willingly iv. enthusiastically
b. She moved her fingers exasperatedly through her hair.
i. pleasingly ii. calmingly iii. patiently iv. annoyingly

=== PAGE 99 ===

 English: Grade 11 92
c. My grandmother is over eighty. She lifted her hands feebly.  
i. strongly ii. robustly iii. weakly iv. firmly
d. She is wearing a tattered shawl.
i. old  ii. torn ii. dirty iv.  branded
e. I have to work at two jobs to make ends meet in this expensi ve city. 
i. earn much money  ii. spend much money
iii. live on money  iv. earn just enough money
C. Spell the following words correctly, adding the suffixes giv en against 
each root.
write + ing arrive + al army + es monkey + es fancy   +  ful
stop + ed worry + ed recur + ing argue + ment create + ive
D. Syllable
a. The following words have only one sound-unit called a syllab le. 
Pronounce them.
dawn      board       straight      spring      prompt      twelfths      strong    small     
text       learn
b. The following words have two syllables. Underline their syll ables and 
pronounce them:
beauty    sleepy      survive      current    woman      hotel
c. Consult an English dictionary and find the number of syllables in the 
following words. Underline and pronounce them.
bury    development        syllabic        vowel        education       discipline        
examination children      separately       pronunciation
 Comprehension  
Answer the following questions.
a. Why didn’t the mother recognise her son Gopi?
b. Why is the sister living with her mother?
c. What is the sister’s attitude towards her brother?
d. Does the son love his mother very much? How do you know that ?
e. What does the mother actually need: a blanket or the warmth of her son’s love?
f. What does the phrase the ‘tattered blanket’ mean?  Is it onl y the blanket that is 

=== PAGE 100 ===

English: Grade 11 93
tattered?
g. The son says, ‘Amma can't remember who I am’. Do you think that he remembered 
his mother? Why didn’t he answer when his sister asked, ‘Do you  remember 
your Amma?’
 Critical thinking 
a. What can be the expectations of the parents from their offsp ring at the old age?
b. Some children who live in a distance tend to be indifferent to the feelings of their 
parents. Why do you think they are like that? Discuss. 
c. A mother's love is everlasting and indispensable. Justify. 
Writing
Writing a diary
What is a diary entry?
Diary Entry/Journal
A diary is a personal record of things that a person has experienced. It can also record 
the writer's thoughts or feelings.
Tips for writing a diary
- Write in the first person 'I'
- Date at the top
- Organize paragraphs with topic sentences
- Give a clear sense of the writer's personality nd explain their feelings and changing 
emotions
- Focus on key moments or incidents in one's world
- Provide a sense of time and sequence (use time connectives like finally, afterwards, 
earlier, later that day ...)
- Varied punctuation
- Varied sentence types
A. Our country is put on lockdown for nearly three months due t o 
COVID-19 pandemic. Following is an example of a diary entry about 
the feelings and experiences of a person who is locked up at home. 

=== PAGE 101 ===

 English: Grade 11 94
Saturday, March 28, 2020
Today is the 5th day that we have been put on lockdown. Almost all the countries in the 
world are forced on to implement this system. And, my country is not an exception too. 
It is called the travellers’ disease which transmits from one person to another through 
physical contact.  WHO has advised people to maintain physical distance, use masks 
and sanitizer. Washing hands with soap very carefully is a common phenomenon. No 
vehicles are in operation in the street and shops are closed. P eople are locked up in 
their own homes like caged animals in the zoo. What a situation  that has enforced us 
to be locked up in our own home!
A very microorganism is threatening the human existence. Are human beings enemies 
to nature so that we are facing such a threat? Maybe we have done irreparable damage 
to nature in the name of development. We have encroached upon nature and destroyed 
the habitats of other living beings. Developed countries are in  a race to test nuclear 
weapons and missiles to demonstrate their power and pelf. Now w here’s their power 
gone? Why cannot they get victory over corona virus? What’s the use of their so-called 
devastating weapons? Now it seems that corona virus is taking t he side of creatures 
to challenge the so-called superpower of the cosmos. This microorganism is affecting   
human lives very badly irrespective of class, caste, religion, race, geography and 
ideology.
Now I could imagine how caged birds and animals feel when they are behind the 
bar. We are in the cage! I am feeling as if I am locked up in t he human zoo. Perhaps 
it is the demand of time to teach humans a serious lesson about  their existence. I can 
feel how badly people might be suffering due to lock down. The world has stood still 
due to corona virus. The worst thing about this situation is th at there is no vaccine 
or any medicine made for the cure of this pandemic virus. Just staying at home and 
maintaining physical distance is the only solution to COVID-19. 
I hope we will soon be free from this pandemic. Let’s stay at home safe and sound!
Makar
B. Suppose a child who lived in a city with his/her parents acc ompanied 
his/her father to visit an elderly grandmother in the village. The 
grandmother was waiting for her son to come back to the village  and 
look after her, but her son was not willing to do so. Write a d iary on 
behalf of the elderly grandmother describing her feeling of not  living 
with her children and grandchildren.

=== PAGE 102 ===

English: Grade 11 95
Grammar
Connectives (but, however, although/even though, in spite of/despite)
A. Look at these examples to see how subordinating conjunctions  a r e  
used.
Your mother always remembers you but you don't do so.
 I was very weak at Mathematics. However, I could top the class.
Although/Even though it rained all day, we enjoyed the picnic very much.
Despite/In spite of  the fact that it rained all day, we enjoyed the picnic very 
much.
Despite/In spite of the fact that I was late, my teacher let me enter the class.
Despite/In spite of being late, my teacher let me enter the class.
In spite of her old age, she is still very active.
B. Complete the following sentences with however, although or in spite of.
a. …… the fact that he is an octogenarian; he still leads an ac tive life.
b. I still enjoyed the week …… the weather was bad.
c. He has passed MA. ……, he hasn’t got a job.
d. …… I had a headache, I enjoyed the movie.
e. Ramila didn’t get the job …… the fact that she had all the n ecessary 
qualifications.
f. …… the fact that he had no money, he bought the car anyway.
g. We can go to the park for lunch. …… , the weather report say s it's going to 
rain.
h. …… I speak English well, my first language is actually Maith ili.
C. Combine the following sentences using the words given in bra ckets.
a. He was annoyed. He didn’t say anything. (although)
b. Playing the stock market is exciting. It can be risky. (howe ver)
c. He works slowly. He never makes a mistake. (even though)
d. It was raining. We still went to the park. (in spite of)
e. Hark bought the watch. It was expensive. (despite)
f. He is very poor. He wears expensive clothes. (but)

=== PAGE 103 ===

 English: Grade 11 96
D. Rewrite the following sentences using (a) although and (b) in spite of.
a. He had very little time, but he offered to help us.
b. She is very poor, but she still wears expensive clothes.
c. He's a millionaire, but he lives in a very small flat. 
d. They have a lot of money, but they are still not happy.
e. The traffic was heavy, but we got there in time.
Listening
A. Look at the following picture, and guess answers to these qu estions. 
a. Who are these people?
b. What are they talking about?
c. What relation do they have?
B. Now, listen to the conversation and write whether these sent ences are 
True or False.
a. The boy has graduated in English and Psychology long back.
b. He worked as a full time teacher in Japan initially. 
c. He had to teach only English to his students.  
d. It's not been long since he returned back to the USA.  
e. More than two dozen candidates have submitted their applicat ion for the 
post. 
f. The man is multilingual.
C. Listen to the conversation again and answer these questions.  
a. Which two subjects did the man teach when he was in Tokyo?
b. What did his students want to do in the future?
c. Why did he have to return back to his homeland?
d. How many reasons did the interviewer ask the man to apply fo r the job?
e. Name the language the man speaks fluently. 
D. Have you ever got selected for a job? If yes, share your exp erience 
how you got that job.


=== PAGE 104 ===

English: Grade 11 97
E. What makes a person suitable for a job? Discuss in groups an d list 
down some of the important traits of a good prospective candida te. 
Collaboratively, make a common list of such traits. 
Speaking
Expressing reactions
A. Look at these expressions of expressing reactions.
B. Now, look at some of the ways to react on sudden/unexpected events. 
Positive reactions Negative reactions
That’s (so) good.
That’s great.
I’m glad to hear that.
That sounds good.
How wonderful/fantastic.
What wonderful news!
Great/Superb/Brilliant!
Really? That’s amazing!
That’s (so) sad.
That’s bad.
I’m sorry to hear that.
That sounds bad.
How awful/terrible.
What a pity!
Too bad!
Really? I find that hard to believe.
That's so good
My wife lost the 
mobile I presented 
in her birthday
I won a lottery 
of Rs. 10000
I'm sorry to 
hear that.

=== PAGE 105 ===

 English: Grade 11 98
C. Work in a pair. Make dialogues between two friends using the  
situations below. 
a. A has won boys single badminton game. 
b. A has been engaged. 
c. Someone says his/her pet dog died yesterday. 
d. A spilt tea over his favourite novel. 
e. Somebody stole your precious watch. 
f. Your house was broken into.
g. Your friend suggests you to go for a horror movie. 
Project Work
Visit to the senior citizens who live alone in your community. Talk to them for about 
an hour. Ask them where their children and grandchildren are an d how often they 
meet. Also, talk about how they feel being away from their children and what specific 
problems they face in this age. Write a newspaper article on ho w the senior citizens 
could be supported in their old age when they are living alone.

=== PAGE 106 ===

English: Grade 11 99
Unit 11 Arts and Creation
“Imagination is the beginning of creation. You imagine what you desire, you will what 
you imagine and at last you create what you will.” - George Bernard Shaw 
Reading
Why Is the Renaissance Important?
 Before you read 
a. Why is this painting famous for?
b. Name any three famous writers/artists of Nepal. Also describ e 
why they are famous for.
Now read the following article about the changes that occurred 
in the Renaissance period.
During the Middle Ages (from about 500 C.E. to the mid-1400s) t here were no great 
changes in the way of life in Europe. People did what their forefathers did before them, 
and there were few new inventions or discoveries. Most people believed in what they 
were told and did not care about anything outside their lives. One reason for this may 
be because only a few people received an education, and books w ere scarce. Then, 
a change began. People became better educated, trade and indust ry developed, the 
arts flourished, and explorers discovered new lands. We call th is great change the 
Renaissance, which in French means "rebirth". The Renaissance, which took place in 
Europe between the thirteenth and sixteenth centuries, was a ne w stage in the history 
of the world.
Some people think that the Renaissance got 
started when the Turks took over the Greek city 
Constantinople (now Istanbul) in 1453. Greek 
scholars left Constantinople and settled in other 
parts of Europe. In these new locations, they taught 
Greek and shared their precious books. The study of 
classical Greek and Roman writers and thinkers began again, and  a new desire for 
learning spread throughout Europe.
People began to inquire into everything, and some began to question their beliefs and 
ways of thinking. In Germany, Martin Luther started a revolt ag ainst the conventions 
of the Roman Catholic Church. Soon, other Christians agreed that the Church needed 


=== PAGE 107 ===

 English: Grade 11 100
to change, and several new Christian reli gions were established. 
Other people began to think about new types of government that were based on the 
democratic values of ancient Greece. Italy, the birthplace of t he Renaissance, was 
organized into city-states that governed themselves. Though wealthy families and the 
Church held much of the power in these areas, the city-states w ere moving a step in 
the direction of government by the people. The most famous poli tical thinker of the 
Renaissance was Niccolo Machiavelli. In his book on government entitled The Prince, 
he stated that a good leader could do bad and dishonest things in order to preserve 
his power and protect his government. Though people in his own time thought that 
Machiavelli was evil for saying these things, his book is now f amous and modern 
political thinkers respect some of his ideas.
The "new learning" taught people to think in new ways, and it also encouraged gifted 
people to paint pictures, make statues and buildings, and write great literature. In fact, 
some of the best artists of the day did all of these things. As  a result, when a person 
today is skilled in many areas, he or she is often called a "Re naissance man" or a 
"Renaissance woman".
The artistic developments of the Renaissance first happened in the Italian city of 
Florence, and then they spread to other Italian cities. As a result of trade and banking, 
cities like Florence, Venice, and Milan became very wealthy, an d their rich citizens 
had both the time and money to enjoy music, art, and poetry. Th ese cities produced 
great painters and sculptors, like Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vi nci, and Raphael. 
These artists created some of history's finest works of art. For example, Michelangelo 
spent four years painting thousands of feet of curved ceiling i n the Vatican's Sistine 
Chapel. To do this, he had to learn a whole new style of painting. He also had to paint 
lying on his back beneath the ceiling as paint dripped down onto his face. Despite these 
obstacles, he created one of art's greatest masterpieces.
A new kind of architecture also began in the Renaissance. It blended the old, classical 
styles with new ideas. Again, it started in Florence. A cathedr al had been started in 
1296, but it remained unfinished for over 100 years because no one could figure 
out how to build the curved roof that it needed. Then architect  Filippo Brunelleschi 
invented a new type of dome that was higher and grander than an y from the classical 
era. The dome marks the beginning of Renaissance architecture.
From Italy, interest in the arts and new ways of thinking sprea d to other countries. 
The Netherlands became famous for great painters; England produ ced many writers, 
including William Shakespeare; and Spain had the literature of Cervantes. The new 

=== PAGE 108 ===

English: Grade 11 101
passion for learning also led to amazing discoveries in science by Galileo, Kepler, and 
Newton. Some of these findings went against the most basic beli efs of the time. For 
example, Galileo's discovery that the sun, not the Earth, was t he centre of the solar 
system got him into serious trouble with many religious people.  They forced him to 
say that he had been wrong about his discovery, even though he knew he was right.
The development of the printing press in Germany by a man named  Johannes 
Gutenberg helped more than anything to spread the new ideas of the Renaissance. 
Before that time, books were scarce and very expensive because they were written 
by hand. Gutenberg discovered how to use a moveable metal type,  and his first book 
was published in 1455. Printing was a very important invention.  With it, books were 
made more cheaply and quickly than ever. In addition, most book s had been written 
in Latin before, as this was thought to be the language of stud y. However, with the 
Renaissance, the middle classes could now afford books, and the y wanted books in 
their own languages. They also wanted a greater variety of thin gs to read, such as 
books on travel, poetry, and romance. Printing helped make the works of the best 
writers and all kinds of knowledge available to all.
About the time printing was discovered, sailors were setting out on voyages of discovery. 
Now that the Turks were masters of the eastern Mediterranean, it was no longer possible to 
trade with India by the old land route. A new way had to be found, perhaps by sailing around 
the coast of Africa or perhaps by sailing around the world! There were many explorers 
around this time, including Columbus, Vasco de Gama, Cabot, Mag ellan, and Drake. 
Representing countries throughout Europe, these men sailed new waters and discovered 
new lands, including the Americas. With all this travel, tools for exploration and navigation 
improved, and better ships were made. As people traveled, they gained new ideas that 
helped to change their way of living. For example, Europeans now wanted goods—such as 
spices, silk, and gold—from far away countries.
The Renaissance didn't begin suddenly when Constantinople was t aken over by the 
Turks or when the first book was printed in 1455. Forces that brought it about had been 
developing for many years as Europeans began to desire and gain  new knowledge. 
From this new learning came the great changes that we call the Renaissance. These 
advancements—from the discovery of printing to a renewed interest in art and literature 
and the discovery of new lands—affected almost every area of Eu ropean life. They 
also formed the basis for many parts of our modern life and beliefs. This is why some 
people think of the Renaissance as the beginning of modern history.
Broukal Milada

=== PAGE 109 ===

 English: Grade 11 102
 Ways with words 
A. Circle the correct meanings of the underlined words.
a. Martin Luther started a revolt against the conventions of th e Roman Catholic 
Church.
i. styles ii. creations iii. customs iv. writings
b. It blended classical styles with new ideas.
i. separated ii. corrected iii. put side by side iv. mixed toge ther
c. The dome marks the beginning of Renaissance architecture.
i. indicates ii. tells iii. serves as a sign of iv. makes
d. The arts flourished during the Renaissance.
i. were almost forgotten ii. grew and improved
iii. discovered  iv. stayed about the same
e. The new passion for learning also led to amazing discoveries  in science.
i.enthusiasm ii. emotion iii. logic iv. power
B. Study the examples of phrasal verbs and idioms.
 Phrasal verbs
This is the form. Please can you fill it in? 
Why are you bringing that argument up now?
Police are looking into connections between the two crimes.
We need to come up with a solution.
Idioms
I lost my head completely.
I can’t believe the weather. It’s raining cats and dogs!
They decided to bury the hatchet and try to be friends again.
Did you notice the diﬀ erence between phrasal verbs and idioms?
C. What do the following idioms mean? Use them in sensible sent ences. 
a hot potato once in a blue moon a bed of roses
when pigs fly miss the boat zip your lip
fight tooth and nail when life gives you lemon goose egg

=== PAGE 110 ===

English: Grade 11 103
D. Match the following phrasal verbs with their meanings. 
a. break down i. to extinguish (fire)
b. check out ii. to  invent a story or lie
c. fed up iii. to quit a habit
d. fill out iv. to remove clothes or shoes from the body, to 
depart as in airplane
e. get away v. to die
f. give away vi. to wait anxiously for something or an event
g. give up vii. tired of something or someone
h. look forward to viii. to give something to someone for free
i. make up ix. to leave a hotel 
j. pass away x. to escape 
k. put out xi. to stop functioning (vehicle, machine)
l. take off xii. to complete a form
 Comprehension 
A. Answer these questions.
a. What does the word Renaissance mean? Which language is it de rived 
from? 
b. What did the Greek scholars do in their new locations after leaving the 
Greek city?
c, How did 'new learning' teach people to think in different wa ys?
d. Describe the artistic developments of Renaissance in brief.
e. Name the three Renaissance scientists who made great discove ries?
f. Who developed the printing press? Which country was he from?
g. Why is the development of the printing press considered as o ne of the gifts 
of Renaissance?
h. Name the five famous explorers of the Renaissance?
i. Why do some people think of the Renaissance as the beginning  of modern 
history? 

=== PAGE 111 ===

 English: Grade 11 104
B. What do you infer from the reading? Tick (√) the best answer .
a. Before the Renaissance…
i. middle-class people did a lot of reading.
ii. education was limited to scholars and privileged people. 
iii, people wanted to change their lives but couldn't. 
iv. people were eager to learn new things. 
b. Which statement is true?
i. The Greeks had a strong influence on Renaissance thinking.
ii. France was the birthplace of the Renaissance.
iii, Turkish scholars spread their knowledge throughout Europe.
iv. German philosophers were responsible for starting the Renai ssance.
c. What did the Renaissance do?
i. It helped leaders maintain control over the middle class.
ii. It discouraged people to go against traditional beliefs.
iii, It caused people to make changes in their lives.
iv. It influenced people to fight against each other.
d. What were the major causes of the Renaissance?
i. changes in government
ii. explorations of new lands
iii. new artists and writers who created great works
iv. printing, reading and learning
 Critical thinking 
a. Do you agree with Machiavelli's view that a good leader can do bad and dishonest 
things in order to preserve his power and protect his government? Explain. 
b. Do you think that art and literature are important assets of  a country? Give 
reasons.
Writing
a. Write an essay on “Literature is the reflection of society.”
b. It is said that today’s reader is tomorrow’s leader. Do you agree with this 
statement? Explain. 
c. Write a short biography of a national literary, artistic or historical figure you 
appreciate most.

=== PAGE 112 ===

English: Grade 11 105
Grammar
Relative clauses 
A. Study these examples
The woman who lives next door works in a bank. (The woman lives  next door. 
She works in a bank.)
That grey thing, which you can see on the roof there, isn’t very traditional. (That 
grey thing isn't very traditional. You can see it on the roof there.)
The parts of the sentences in bold above are relative clauses. We use relative 
clauses to describe or give extra information about something w e have already 
mentioned. We often use relative pronouns (e.g. who, where, that, which, whose) 
to introduce relative clauses. 
In the first example 'who lives next door' is defining relative  clause. Defining 
relative clauses give us essential information – information th at tells us who or 
what we are talking about.
In the second example 'which you can see on the roof there'. No n-defining 
relative clauses give us extra information which isn't absolute ly necessary. We 
use commas to separate them from the rest of the sentence, unle ss they come at 
the end of the sentence, when we use a comma and a full stop.
B. Complete the following sentences with correct relative prono uns and 
write whether the clauses are defining or non-defining.
a. That's the house …… I was born.
b. My aunt Nita, …… a journalist, is coming to visit next week.
c. People …… like outdoor activities will love our holidays.
d. The early 1960s, …… the Beatles first started, was a very ex citing time in 
pop culture.
e. My essay on Shakespeare, …… I found quite difficult, got a r eally good 
mark in the end.
f. The Mayans, …… lived in Central America, built many stunning  temples.
g. That's the girl …… brother is in your class.
h. The snake …… was in the garden last week belongs to our next -door 
neighbor.

=== PAGE 113 ===

 English: Grade 11 106
C. Join the following pairs of sentences with appropriate relat ive clause.
a. He is a musician. His albums have sold millions.
b. Amelia speaks English and Chines fluently. She is from Shang hai.
c. That's the stadium. Real Madrid plays there.
d. Dublin is my favourite city. It is the capital of Ireland.
e. The person was really helpful. They spoke to him.
f. This smartphone takes great photos. I bought it last week.
Listening
A. Look at the picture and answer these questions. 
a. What are the people in the picture 
doing? 
b. What are they talking about? 
c. What do you think is a ‘renaissance 
man’ like?
B. Listen to The Talk Show about Leonardo da Vinci and tick the  correct 
alternatives. 
a. What is Leonardo da Vinci most popular for? 
i. his imagination  ii. his paintings 
iii. his engineering    iii. his invention 
b. Which of the following is not the skill of da Vinci? 
i. sculpting  ii. stage designing
iii. teaching iv. experimenting
c. Why did he spend most of his time studying the nature? 
i. to paint precisely ii. to invent precisely
iii. to experiment precisely iv. to study precisely 


=== PAGE 114 ===

English: Grade 11 107
d. Who is the host of The Talk Show? 
i. Martin Kemp ii. Bridget Kendall
iii. Carmen C. Bambach iv. Marina Wallace
e. What did da Vinci think about the nature, according to Marti n Kemp? 
i. It’s a unified thing ii. It’s a separate thing 
iii. It’s a mysterious thing  iv. It’s a diverse thing 
f. Why does Carmen Bambach accept da Vinci as a superhuman?  
i. because of his lively paintings 
ii. because of his ingenuity 
iii. because of his curiosity and desire of questioning  
iv. because of his dedication in invention 
g. According to Marina, what makes Leonardo a typical renaissan ce man? 
i. his drawings 
ii. his craftsmanship 
iii. his sculpts 
iv. his versatility 
C. Listen to the audio again and match the following descriptio ns with 
appropriate people.
a. an artist and a scientist and inventor, i. Marina Wallace 
 engineer, paleontologist, cartographers, 
 stage designer and much
b. interviewer and programme host at BBC Forum ii. Martin Kemp
c. a British emeritus professor in the history of Art iii. Leon ardo da Vinci
 at Oxford University in the UK. 
d. is a curator in the Department of Drawings iv. Carmen C. Bam bach
 and Prints, The Metropolitan Museum
 of Art, New York
e. Italian curator and art historian v. Professor White  
  vi. Marina Wallace 

=== PAGE 115 ===

 English: Grade 11 108
D. Leonardo da Vinci was a polymath. Do you agree? Give your re asons.
Speaking
Describing people
a. Look at the given pictures and 
describe people’s hair, nose, 
eyes, chin, lips, etc. in terms 
of their length, shape, style and 
size. 
b. Study the words given below 
which are used to describe 
people’s body parts and talk to 
your friends.
 shoulder, length, long, curly, 
wavy, short, round, pointed, wide, oval, almond-shaped, flat, b ald, big, dark, 
pale, whitish, square, thick, thin 
c. Now, present a short description of your head teacher. Inclu de her/his age, 
physique, dress-up and special characteristics. 
Project Work
Prepare a profile of a great artist of Nepal  such as Araniko,  Lain Singh Bangdel etc. 
and present to the class.


=== PAGE 116 ===

English: Grade 11 109
Unit 12 Fantasy
“Imagination is more important than knowledge. For knowledge is  limited to all we 
now know and understand, while imagination embraces the entire world, and all there 
ever will be to know and understand.” - Albert Einstein
Reading
Down the Rabbit Hole
 Before you read 
a. Why do people have dreams? 
b. Find any four other terms that refer to dreaming and 
explain their meanings. 
c. What does 'down the rabbit hole' mean?
Now read the following extract from a novel, where Alice, dozing off as her sister 
reads to her, jumps down the rabbit hole falling for quite a wh ile and landing in 
a mysterious hall.
Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the bank, and of having 
nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into the book, her sister was reading, but 
it had no pictures or conversations in it, “and what is the use of a book,” thought Alice, 
“without pictures or conversations?”
So she was considering, in her own mind (as well as she could, for the hot day made 
her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasure of makin g a daisy-chain would 
be worth the trouble of getting up and picking the daisies, whe n suddenly a White 
Rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her.
There was nothing so very remarkable in that; nor did Alice think it so very much out 
of the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself “Oh dear! Oh dear! I shall be too late!” (when 
she thought it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she oug ht to have wondered at 
this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural); but, when t he Rabbit actually took a 
watch out of its waistcoat-pocket, and looked at it, and then h urried on, Alice started 
to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had never before seen a rabbit with 
either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to take out of it, and, burning with curiosity, she 
ran across the field after it, and was just in time to see it pop down a large rabbit-hole 
under the hedge.


=== PAGE 117 ===

 English: Grade 11 110
In another moment down went Alice after it, never once considering how in the world 
she was to get out again.
The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then dipped suddenly 
down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think about stopping herself before 
she found herself falling down what seemed to be a very deep well.
Either the well was very deep, or she fell very 
slowly, for she had plenty of time as she went 
down to look about her, and to wonder what was 
going to happen next. First, she tried to look down 
and make out what she was coming to, but it was 
too dark to see anything: then she looked at the 
sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled 
with cupboards and book-shelves: here and there 
she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs. She 
took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed: it was l abeled “ORANGE 
MARMALADE,” but to her great disappointment it was empty: she d id not like to 
drop the jar, for fear of killing somebody underneath, so managed to put it into one of 
the cupboards as she fell past it.
“Well!” thought Alice to herself. “After such a fall as this, I  shall think nothing of 
tumbling down-stairs! How brave they’ll all think me at home! W hy, I wouldn’t say 
anything about it, even if I fell oﬀ  the top of the house!” (Which was very likely true.)
Down, down, down. Would the fall nevercome to an end? “I wonder how many miles 
I’ve fallen by this time?” she said aloud. “I must be getting somewhere near the centre 
of the earth. Let me see: that would be four thousand miles down, I think..... ” (for, you 
see, Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her lesson s in the school-room, and 
though this was not a verygood opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there 
was no one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) “...yes, that’s about 
the right distance but then I wonder what Latitude or Longitude  I’ve got to?” (Alice 
had not the slightest idea what Latitude was, or Longitude either, but she thought they 
were nice grand words to say.)
Presently she began again. “I wonder if I shall fall right through the earth! How funny 
it’ll seem to come out among the people that walk with their he ads downwards! The 
antipathies, I think” (she was rather glad there was no one lis tening, this time, as it 
didn’t sound at all the right word) “...but I shall have to ask them what the name of the 
country is, you know. Please, Ma’am, is this New Zealand? Or Au stralia?” (and she 


=== PAGE 118 ===

English: Grade 11 111
tried to curtsey as she spoke fancy, curtseying as you’re falli ng through the air! Do 
you think you could manage it?) “And what an ignorant little gi rl she’ll think me for 
asking! No, it’ll never do to ask: perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.”
Down, down, down. There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon began talking again. 
“Dinah’ll miss me very much to-night, I should think!” (Dinah w as the cat.) “I hope 
they’ll remember her saucer of milk at tea-time. Dinah, my dear ! I wish you were 
down here with me! There are no mice in the air, I’m afraid, bu t you might catch a 
bat, and that’s very like a mouse, you know. But do cats eat bats, I wonder?” And here 
Alice began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of way, 
“Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?” and sometimes “Do bats eat cats?”, for, you see, 
as she couldn’t answer either question, it didn’t much matter which way she put it. She 
felt that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in 
hand with Dinah, and was saying to her, very earnestly, “Now, Dinah, tell me the truth: 
did you ever eat a bat?”, when suddenly, thump! thump! down she  came upon a heap 
of sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.
Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a  moment: she looked 
up, but it was all dark overhead: before her was another long p assage, and the White 
Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it. There was not a mo ment to be lost: away 
went Alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, “Oh 
my ears and whiskers, how late it’s getting!” She was close behind it when she turned 
the corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found herself in a long, low 
hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging from the roof.
There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when Alice had been 
all the way down one side and up the other, trying every door, she walked sadly down 
the middle, wondering how she was ever to get out again.
Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of  solid glass: there was 
nothing on it but a tiny golden key, and Alice’s first idea was that this might belong to 
one of the doors of the hall; but, alas! Either the locks were too large, or the key was 
too small, but at any rate it would not open any of them. However, on the second time 
round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a 
little door about fifteen inches high: she tried the little gol den key in the lock, and to 
her great delight it fitted!
Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passag e, not much larger 
than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the passage into the loveliest garden 

=== PAGE 119 ===

 English: Grade 11 112
you ever saw. How she longed to get out of that dark hall, 
and wander about among those beds of bright flowers 
and those cool fountains, but she could not even get her 
head through the doorway; “and even if my head would 
go through,” thought poor Alice, “it would be of very little 
use without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I could shut 
up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only knew how to 
begin.” For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had happene d lately, that Alice 
had begun to think that very few things indeed were really impossible.
There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so 
she went back to the table, half hoping she might find another 
key on it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people u p 
like telescopes: this time she found a little bottle on it (“wh ich 
certainly was not here before,” said Alice), and tied round the  
neck of the bottle was a paper label, with the words “DRINK 
ME” beautifully printed on it in large letters.
It was all very well to say “Drink me,” but the wise little Alice was not going to do that 
in a hurry. “No, I’ll look first,” she said, “and see whether it’s marked ‘poison’ or not”; 
for she had read several nice little stories about children who had got burnt, and eaten 
up by wild beasts, and other unpleasant things, all because the y would not remember 
the simple rules their friends had taught them: such as, that a  red-hot poker will burn 
you if you hold it too long; and that, if you cut your finger v ery deeply with a knife, 
it usually bleeds; and she had never forgotten that, if you dri nk much from a bottle 
marked “poison,” it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later.
However, this bottle was not marked “poison,” so Alice ventured to taste it, and, finding 
it very nice (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed flavour of cherr y-tart, custard, pine-apple, 
roast turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast), she very soon finished it off.
“What a curious feeling!” said Alice. “I must be shutting up like a telescope!”
And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face brightened up at 
the thought that she was now the right size for going through t he little door into that 
lovely garden. First, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to 
shrink any further: she felt a little nervous about this; “for it might end, you know,” 
said Alice to herself, “in my going out altogether, like a candle. I wonder what I should 
be like then?” And she tried to fancy what the flame of a candl e looks like after the 


=== PAGE 120 ===

English: Grade 11 113
candle is blown out, for she could not remember ever having seen such a thing.
After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going into the 
garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the d oor, she found she had 
forgotten the little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it, she found 
she could not possibly reach it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she 
tried her best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery; and when 
she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing sat down and cried.
“Come, there’s no use in crying like that!” said Alice to herself rather sharply. “I advise 
you to leave off this minute!” She generally gave herself very good advice (though she 
very seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring 
tears into her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having 
cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against he rself, for this curious 
child was very fond of pretending to be two people. “But it’s n o use now,” thought 
poor Alice, “to pretend to be two people! Why, there’s hardly e nough of me left to 
make one respectable person!”
Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table: she opened it, and 
found in it a very small cake, on which the words “EAT ME” were beautifully marked 
in currants. “Well, I’ll eat it,” said Alice, “and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach 
the key; and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door: so either way I’ll 
get into the garden, and I don’t care which happens!”
She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself “Which way?  Which way?” holding 
her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was growin g; and she was quite 
surprised to find that she remained the same size. To be sure, this is what generally 
happens when one eats cake; but Alice had got so much into the way of expecting 
nothing but out-of-the-way things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life 
to go on in the common way. So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.
Lewis Carroll
 Ways with words 
A. Find the meanings of the following words and phrases from a dictionary 
and make sentences by using them.
peep into pop down remarkable hedge wonder tumble
doze off  earnestly tiny creep

=== PAGE 121 ===

 English: Grade 11 114
B. Match the words below with their opposites.
a. beginning i. happiness
b. stupid ii. calmly
c. natural iii. educated
d. disappointment iv. clever
e. ignorant v. artificial
f. anxiously vi. ending
C. Pronouncing /s/ and /ʃ/, /s/ and /z/
a. Practise the pronunciation of the following pairs of words. 
see/she sip/ship sort/short save/shave
sock/shock seat/sheet so/show sew/show
sit/shit said/shed sake/shake seep/sheep
b. Pronounce the following minimal pairs of words correctly. 
price/prize rice/rise peace/peas loose/lose
bus/buzz face/phase seal/zeal device/devise
 Comprehension 
A. Answer these questions.
a. What did Alice do while her sister was reading a book?
b. Why did Alice run across the field after the Rabbit?
c. Why didn’t she like to drop the jar? What did she do with it ?
d. What idea came to her mind when she saw a tiny golden key?
e. What was written on the bottle that she found? Did she follo w what it said?
f. Alice was fond of pretending to be two people. Who were they ?
g. Why did she want to eat the cake that she found?
B. Put these sentences in the right order as they happen in the  story. 
a. Alice ate a small cake, which said, ‘EAT ME’.
b. Alice found a small key and unlocked a very small door.
c. Alice fell down a rabbit hole.
d. Alice drank something from a bottle and got very small.

=== PAGE 122 ===

English: Grade 11 115
e. Alice tried to climb a table leg to get the key again.
f. Alice saw a White Rabbit and ran after him.
 Critical thinking 
a. “Down the rabbit hole” is a sort of writing called fantasy. On the basis of your 
reading of the story point out some special elements of this kind of writing? 
b. Is it good to imagine of things which are not possible to ac hieve in reality? 
Explain. 
c. Do you talk to yourself when you are in a trouble? If yes, how does it help you?
Writing
a. Narrate, in short, a folktale that you have read or heard.
b. Describe a strange dream that you have seen recently.
Grammar
Wish
A. Study the given examples.     
I wish I had a car.
I wish I could speak English fluently.
I wish he would lend me some money. 
I wish I lived closer to my family.
I wish they wouldn't park their car in front of my house.
He wishes he could afford a holiday.
They wish they hadn't eaten so much chocolate.
B. Express your wishes in the following situations in three dif ferent ways.  
Use I wish/If only…….
a. You don’t have a mobile phone (You need one).
b. You don’t know the answer of a question from the lesson. 
c. You can’t play the guitar.
d. It’s cold.
e. You are feeling sick.
f. You live in a crowded city.
g. You feel lonely. 

=== PAGE 123 ===

 English: Grade 11 116
C. Rewrite the following sentences making correction if necessa ry.
a. I wish my father bought me a bike.
b. I wish I would write poems.
c. I wish I could remember her name.
d. I wish I had a god job.
e. I wish I would be rich.
Listening
A. Look at the given picture and guess answer to the questions.  
a. What is the man doing in the picture? Do you 
know him? How? 
b. Where did the incidence shown in the picture 
take place?
B. Listen to a piece of a historic public speech by Martin Luth er King Jr. 
and answer the questions. 
a. When was the Emancipation Proclamation signed? 
b. How did the slaves feel about the proclamation? 
c. How was the condition of the Negro even after a hundred year s? 
d. What three things did the American Constitution promise to i ts citizens? 
e. What does Dr. King compare the American discriminatory notes  given to 
the black citizens? 
f. What, according to him, is the main purpose of their gatheri ng in the capital 
of the nation? 
C. Listen to the audio again and write ‘True’ for true statemen ts and 
‘False’ for false ones. 
a. ‘A great American’ in the speech refers to Abraham Lincoln. 
b. The black slaves couldn’t have their freedom even after a ce ntury of 
Emancipation Proclamation. 
c. The blacks were treated like foreigners in their own country . 
d. According to King, American banks were refusing to cash the checks of 
black citizens. 


=== PAGE 124 ===

English: Grade 11 117
e. King does not believe that America lacks the opportunity of justice. 
D. Listen to the complete audio of “I have a Dream” and make a list of 
any three things that Martin Luther King dreams of.
Speaking
Expressing regrets 
A. Susan has failed her exams. Now she feels sorry for not stud ying hard. 
Study the different ways of her expression of regret. 
a. I wish I had studied hard. 
b. I should have paid attention to the teachers in the class.
c. If only I had been regular to my classes. 
d. I shouldn’t have ignored my parents’ advice. 
e. If only I hadn’t missed my classes.
B. Express regrets using I wish/If only  and should have /had  with past 
participle based on the following situations.
a. Your friend has betrayed you. 
b. You have got a cold. 
c. You are lost in a town. 
d. You have lost your phone. 
e. You couldn’t attend your brother’s wedding. 
Project Work
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland  is a children’s novel by English author Lewis 
Carroll, published in 1865. It is a story of a young girl named  Alice falling through 
a rabbit hole into a fantasy world populated by peculiar, anthr opomorphic creatures. 
With its fantastical tales and riddles, it became one of the mo st popular works of 
English-language fiction.
Read the whole novel or a similar novel in a library or in the Internet, and write its 
short review.


=== PAGE 125 ===

 English: Grade 11 118
Unit 13 Career and Entrepreneurship
“As we look ahead into the next century, leaders will be those who empower others.” –Bill 
Gates
Reading
Mahabir Pun: A Visionary Social Entrepreneur
 Before you read 
Name any four renowned social workers of Nepal and mention thei r contributions to 
the country. 
S.N Name of the social worker Contribution 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Mahabir Pun (22 January 1955), born and raised 
at Nangi in Myagdi District, Nepal, is a teacher, 
social entrepreneur, innovator and social activist. 
He is known for his extensive work in applying 
wireless technologies to develop remote areas of 
the Himalayas. He has designed income-generation 
initiatives that deliver new economic possibilities 
to villagers allowing them to be sustainable.
He is building self-sustainable, community-run schools that  im prove the quality 
of education, bring jobs and opportunities to villages, and cur b migration to urban 
centers.His works have been recognized by the Ashoka Foundation , the Ramon 
Magsaysay Foundation, University of Nebraska, Global Ideas Bank  and Nepal 
Government.
Now, read the following interview with Mr. Pun.  
You got a scholarship to study in the USA. After your education , why did you 
come back to Nepal and what plans had you made for Nepal then?
I could have lived in the US if I had wanted to do so. I was a good student at the 
university and my professors liked me very much.  It would not have been difficult for 


=== PAGE 126 ===

English: Grade 11 119
me to find a job there.  However, I had found that life in the US was not easy either 
as many people think. People in developed countries like the US   also have to work 
hard in order to make money for comfortable living, for raising  their family and for 
maintaining their lifestyle.
Therefore, I decided to come to Nepal to visit my family and fr iends as soon as I 
graduated from the university. However, I did not have any plan  and idea as what I 
could do in Nepal. I also did not have money to do anything. Th e only thing I had 
decided before I came to Nepal was not to apply for any job for  living. I did not start 
any business either because I did not have money and idea. Therefore, I decided to stay 
in my home village Nangi of Myagdi district and to help villagers start a high school as 
a volunteer teacher. That was the beginning of my lifelong journey in Nepal. 
But those who go abroad for their higher education rarely retur n after their 
education? What made you think to come back and do something for the country?
Yes, many people rarely return after they get their education i n the US and in other 
developed countries. It is their choice. The main reason they d o not return is that 
they know there are almost no job opportunities in Nepal to mak e money for living. 
Therefore, they decide to stay abroad and find job. However, I wanted not to work for 
people or for a company in the US or in Nepal to have “so calle d” better living. To 
enjoy in my life, I wanted to work independently and do somethi ng on my own for 
the benefits of human beings. Therefore, I made my decision to come to Nepal and 
stay in mountain villages. I could not have done what I have been able to do in Nepal 
if I had decided to find a job either in the US or in Nepal. Af ter I started living in the 
mountain village and working with the communities, I found that life in the mountain 
villages was more comfortable for me because I was free to do a nything I wanted to 
try. Therefore, I decided to live in Nepal all my life. I am ve ry glad that I decided to 
come and stay in Nepal rather than staying in the US. 
What motivated you to involve in innovation?
The necessity to gain something in life makes people innovators. It was after I started 
living in the mountain villages, I found many problems in the c ommunities, and my 
mind started to think about finding solution for those problems . As a result, I started 
doing lots of brainstorming by myself and with the communities to find ways to start 
and run viable projects for community development. My experienc e tells that you 
should be innovative especially when you want to find solution for a problem. For 
example, I had to be innovative to start income generating proj ects such as paper 

=== PAGE 127 ===

 English: Grade 11 120
making, jam making, cheese making, etc. which nobody in that ar ea had tried before. 
I also had to be innovative to start wireless networking projec t to bring the Internet 
because I did not have ideas and money. The same thing is happe ning with National 
Innovation Centre that was started without any idea and money. To make it short, I can 
tell that it is the necessity of the communities to start diffe rent development projects 
and that it is the necessity to retain the most talented and in novative young people in 
Nepal for economic development that motivated me to be involved in innovation.
Where did you start doing such an entrepreneurship and what have you done up 
to now?
I started it from my village Nangi of Myagdi district. It took a few years for me to learn 
about the situation of other mountain communities and to get acquainted with them. 
I started to work as a volunteer in my village and I really did  not know how long 
I could stay in the village. Step by step, I got involved in th e field of education to 
help improve the quality of education in rural schools by helping to build schools and 
introducing computers and the Internet. I helped to set up comm unity clinics in the 
villages where there were no health posts in order to help peop le to get basic health 
services. Later I connected the clinics to hospital in Pokhara and Kathmandu through 
the Internet for telemedicine. I worked with the community lead ers to start as many 
income generation programmes as possible to help people to make  some money and 
create job opportunities. Some of the income generating program mes that I helped to 
start are Yak farming, camping ground for the trekkers, cheese making, jam making, 
paper making, bee keeping, vegetable farming, handicraft making , fish farming etc. 
I started community based wireless networking programme to brin g computers and 
the Internet in the remote mountain villages. I helped to start  community owned and 
managed ecotourism programmes by starting five day and twelve d ay trekking trails 
with lodges and other facilities for the trekkers.  Those projects are running well. Now I 
am working for the establishment of Rashtriya Awishkar Kendra (National Innovation 
Centre), which has kept me very busy because many young people with innovative 
and creative ideas come to the centre to present their ideas an d to do research and 
development work. Working with them has become my everyday routine now.  Now I 
am travelling all over Nepal to give information about the inno vation centre we have 
started and to encourage young people to be innovative.
When was National Innovation Centre established and what is its main goal? 
National Innovation Centre (NIC) is a nonprofit-making organisa tion established on 

=== PAGE 128 ===

English: Grade 11 121
9 December 2012, and started fundraising campaign and some rese arch works from 
2016. The centre was built at the premise of Research Centre for Applied Science and 
Technology, Tribhuvan University Kirtipur, Kathmandu and was formally inaugurated 
on 18 October 2019.
The main goal of the National Innovation Centre is to retain ta lented, innovative and 
creative young people and use their talents for the economic de velopment of Nepal, 
specifically through research and innovation. I thought about starting the centre because 
after working for 25 years in the villages, I realized the most important step a country 
needs to take in order to become economically prosperous is to keep the talented and 
innovative human capitals in the country and help them become entrepreneurs. All the 
developed countries have always taken that step, which Nepal mu st take if we want 
to become prosperous. That is why I decided to establish innova tion centre. Also the 
ultimate goal of NIC is to help reduce the trade deficit of Nepal by helping innovative 
people to create and develop products that are being imported f rom abroad. It is very 
necessary because we are importing more than 92% of goods and e xporting less than 
8% that has created a huge trade deficit.
Whose support are you getting to enhance your campaign?
I did not seek funding from the government and donors to start project. For doing 
all the works that I have done so far, the main support has bee n coming from people 
and communities. It is because people have found that the proje cts that I have started 
are very beneficial for the communities and for the nation. For  example, most of the 
money for the wireless networking project came from communities  because they 
found that Internet is very useful for them. For the eco-trekking and income generating 
programmes, the money is coming from communities. Even for the establishment of 
NIC, almost all of the support is coming from Nepalese people. Therefore, I can tell 
that my campaign is funded and managed by people for the benefit of people.
How do you think that it would help in developing our country?
Nobody should forget the fact that innovation is the engine to drive the economic 
development. Without giving topmost priority for research and innovation and without 
investing huge amount of money for nurturing its innovative citizen, no country in the 
world has become economically prosperous. The developed countries like the US, the 
UK, Germany, Japan, Israel and others have become prosperous be cause they have 
always given research and innovation the topmost priority for economic development 
and they are investing huge amount of money for that. However, Nepal, so far, is 

=== PAGE 129 ===

 English: Grade 11 122
not investing any money or too little money for research and in novation.  Besides, 
we do not have culture of innovation that encourages young peop le to be innovative 
and creative. Keeping these facts in mind, innovation centre wa s established. The 
innovation centre is providing a well-equipped platform in its capacity and full 
support system to the innovators to do research and development . Our innovators are 
trying to develop different types of products or services that can be commercialized 
in the market. That way they would ultimately become entrepreneurs and help for the 
economic development of Nepal.
What do you want to suggest to youths who are going abroad and living there 
forgetting their country?
Going abroad in search of better education and job opportunities is something we can’t 
stop or should not stop unless and until we create good opportunities and environment 
for the talented youths to stay and work in Nepal. Besides, it is human nature to explore 
for new opportunities in foreign soils. It is not entirely thei r fault to go abroad. It is 
our responsibility to create sound environment and support syst em to keep the most 
talented and innovative people and use them for the economic development of Nepal. 
My suggestion and request to those youths, who are going abroad, is not to forget our 
motherland and help Nepal by bringing back innovative ideas tha t can help to create 
the economy of our country and help Nepal become a prosperous nation.
Lastly, do you have to say anything about your plan and vision?
I would like to encourage young students to think about becomin g innovators and 
entrepreneurs by coming up with innovative ideas and by being i nvolved in research 
and innovation activities while they are still attending schools. They should not wait to 
become innovative and entrepreneurs until they graduate from the schools or colleges. 
Also I would like to tell that work of building innovation cent res and nurturing our 
talented and innovative people is something we, the people of N epal, can do by 
ourselves. I would like to request the federal government, state government, and local 
government of Nepal to set aside a small percentage of their de velopment budget for 
setting up innovation centres in order to capture and utilize t he innovative human 
capitals for the economic development of Nepal. 
Thank you for your time and best of luck in the work you have begun.
As always, it is my pleasure to encourage young minds and work with them. With the 
support from the innovative young people, we will certainly be able to make Nepal a 
prosperous nation. There is no doubt in it. 

=== PAGE 130 ===

English: Grade 11 123
 Ways with words 
A. Find the words from the text which mean the following. The f irst letter 
has been given.
a. making you feel physically relaxed; pleasant to wear, sit on , etc. c……….
b. having a degree from the university g……….
c. without being connected with or influenced by something or b y each other   
 i……………
d. the introduction of new things, ideas or ways of doing somet hing i……….
e. familiar with something, having read, seen or experienced it  a……….
f. a person who makes money by starting or running businesses, especially when 
this involves taking financial risks e………..
g. an opportunity or a place for somebody to express their opin ions publicly or 
make progress in a particular area p……..
h. to use something, especially for a practical purpose  u……….
B. The plural form of bacterium is bacteria. Irregular plural nouns are 
nouns that do not become plural by adding -s or -es, as most nouns in 
the English language do. Now, write the plural forms of the following 
nouns.
calf basis sheaf cactus
louse crisis person formula
ox fungus goose oasis
analysis curriculum appendix fungus
 Comprehension 
Answer these questions.
a. How did Mahabir Pun begin his lifelong journey in Nepal afte r coming back to 
Nepal from the US?
b. Why didn't he want to work for other companies in the US or in Nepal?
c. Why did he involve in innovation?
d. What are the income-generating programmes that he helped to start?
e. Whose support is Pun getting to proceed with his campaign?
f. How have the developed countries become prosperous?
g. How can we keep the most talented and innovative people in N epal?

=== PAGE 131 ===

 English: Grade 11 124
 Critical thinking 
a. Pun says, “We do not have culture of innovation that encoura ges young people 
to be innovative and creative”. Do you agree with him? Explain. 
b. What qualities does an individual need to become an entrepre neur?
Writing
A. Writing an informal email
Read the following email and write a reply to it. 
Hi Samia,
Just a quick email to say that sounds like a great idea. Saturday is better for me because 
I'm meeting my parents on Sunday. So if that's still good for you, why don't you come 
here? Then you can see the new flat and all the work we've done on the kitchen since 
we moved in. We can eat at home and then go for a walk in the a fternoon. It's going 
to be so good to catch up finally. I want to hear all about your new job!
Our address is 52 Charles Road, but it's a bit difficult to fin d because the house 
numbers are really strange here. If you turn left at the post office and keep going past 
the big white house on Charles Road, there's a small side stree t behind it with the 
houses 50–56 in. Don't ask me why the side street doesn't have a different name! But 
call me if you get lost and I'll come and get you.
Let me know if there's anything you do/don't like to eat. Reall y looking forward to 
seeing you!
See you soon!
Gregor
(Source: https://learnenglish.britishcouncil.org)
B. Communique (press release)
Communique is an official statement or communication, usually to the press or public. 
Press release is an example of communiqué.
Study the given press release about a telephone conversation between Honorable 
Mr. Pradeep Kumar Gyawali and His Excellency Mr. Michael R. Pompeo.

=== PAGE 132 ===

English: Grade 11 125
Press Release
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Honorable Mr. Pradeep Kumar Gyawa li, had a 
telephone conversation with His Excellency Mr. Michael R. Pompe o, the United 
States Secretary of State, this afternoon.
During the conversation, the two sides shared experiences in th e fight against the 
COVID-19 pandemic. They also offered sympathies and condolences on the loss of 
human lives due to the pandemic. The Foreign Minister and the S ecretary of State 
appreciated each other’s governments for the protection and car e provided to their 
nationals.
The two sides discussed the importance of development partnership between the two 
countries, which has complemented Nepal’s efforts for socioeconomic development. 
Minister Gyawali appreciated the support provided by the US government to Nepal’s 
health sector, among others, through the projects related to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Secretary of State Pompeo assured Nepal of continued US cooperation.
The two sides expressed confidence that cooperation will contin ue to grow in the 
post-COVID context with an enhanced level economic partnership.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Singh Durbar,
Kathmandu
24 June 2020
C. Suppose you are the secretary of the National Innovation Cen tre 
(NIC), Nepal and an innovator from a foreign country had a talk with 
its chairperson, Mahabir Pun about bilateral cooperation. Write  a  
press release statement.

=== PAGE 133 ===

 English: Grade 11 126
Grammar
Present perfect and past simple
A. Notice the use of present perfect and past simple in the fol lowing text.
I think I have had a very interesting life. I'm 73 now and I don't work anymore. I was 
in the army for 31 years. I retired when I was 52. I have been to so many countries 
that I can't remember all of them. I've been to Australia six o r seven times and to 
South Africa three times. I have also been once to Russia but I  didn't like it at all: 
much too cold for me!
I've never been on television, but I've been on the radio once.  It was a programme 
about life in the military about twenty years ago. I've met a l ot of famous people: 
members of the royal family, famous politicians and also famous  cinema and 
television personalities. I've never met the American President though which is a pity.
Because I've travelled a lot, I've seen a lot of wonderful things and have also eaten and 
drunk some strange foods and drinks. I ate cat and rat in India  and drank something 
called Mirto on a little island in Italy many years ago.
B. Look at the diagram about the use of present perfect tense.
just
recently
ever
never
This 
month
This 
week
Present 
result
Recent 
events
This 
morning
How long 
(stative verbs)
Unfinished 
time word
Present 
Perfect
Life experiences 
and achievements
since
today
for
yet
already

=== PAGE 134 ===

English: Grade 11 127
C. We use the past simple for past events or actions which have  no 
connection to the present and the present perfect to talk about  
completed actions which have impacts to the present.
I lost my keys yesterday.
I’ve lost my key. I can’t find it anywhere.
D. We use both 'been (to)' and 'gone (to)' as the past participle of 'go', but 
with different meanings. 
I’ve been to Muktinath.
Prem is on holiday. He has gone to Ilam.
Sarika is back home now. She has been to Jumla.
E. Use the correct tense of the verbs in brackets. 
a. I don't know where Muna is. …… (you/see) her?
b. Janak …… (not/be) very well last week.
c, Last night I …… (lose) my keys. So I stayed in my friend’s h ome.
d. I …… (lose) my keys. Can you help me look for them?
e. I …… (know) Jamuna for three years. We still meet once a mon th.
f. She …… (live) in Sikkim when she was a child.
g. A: What’s wrong?
 B: I …… (break) a glass.
h. A: When …… (you/arrive)? 
 B: At 10 pm last night.
i. How long …… (you/know) Sarmila for?
j. This is the first time I …… (drive) a car.
F. Use been or gone. 
a. I’ve never …… to Japan.
b. Kalpana has …… to Korea. She may come back next year.
c. A: Where’s Rachana?
 B: She has …… to the shops.
d. Harina was here earlier but I think she has …… now.
e. Have you ever …… to London?

=== PAGE 135 ===

 English: Grade 11 128
Listening
A. Look at the picture and answer the questions.
a. What is special about the woman in the picture?
b. Do you have such speciality?
B. Now listen to the recording and answer the following questio ns in no 
more than five words. 
a. When did the speaker get married?
b. How did the car accident take place?
c. Why did she want to paint in the hospital?
d. Why couldn’t she sit herself after she came home from hospit al?
e. Why does she believe that other people are fortunate?
f. Note down two of the fears that she mentions.
g. What was her biggest fear?
h. How did the speaker overcome with the biggest fear?
C. There might be some people in your country who have inspired  the 
world despite their physical disabilities. Find two people and write the 
following information about them. 
S.N Name Type of disability Inspirational work 
1. 
2. 
Speaking
Narrating experiences and achievements
A. Study the following conversation.
Tenzing: Have you travelled a lot, Michael?


=== PAGE 136 ===

English: Grade 11 129
Michale: Yes, I’ve been to many places.
Tenzing: Really? Have you ever been to Darjeeling?
Michale: Yes, I’ve been to Darjeeling twice.
Tenzing: What about Rara?
Michale: No, I’ve never been to Rara.
B. Work in pairs. Take turns to ask and answer questions about 
experiences and/or achievements using Have you ever…? Give true 
answers about yourself.
a. going fishing b. doing yoga
c. winning a prize d. riding a horse
e. meeting a celebrity f. going to Switzerland
g. composing music
Project Work
Work in groups of five. Visit an entrepreneur in your locality and interview him/her. 
Then prepare a short biography of the entrepreneur and share with your friends.

=== PAGE 137 ===

 English: Grade 11 130
Unit 14 Power and Politics
“History is written by the winners.” -Napoleon Bonaparte
Reading
Napoleon Bonaparte
 Before you read 
Discuss these questions with your partner.
a. Name some warriors who fought for your country. 
b Mention the names of any five famous leaders in the world? Al so describe their 
contributions to their countries. 
c. Guess the meaning of the words: statesman, leader, warrior, revolution, emperor, 
empire, guerilla  
Now, read the following article about the power of Napoleon in politics.
Many portraits of Napoleon show him with his right hand 
placed 
inside his coat or shirt. In fact, there was nothing 
wrong with Napoleon's 
hand. At the time, portrait painters 
thought this pose made men look more dignified. Also, 
they had one less hand to draw and paint. Looking at his 
portraits, we can tell that Napoleon was an important 
person. But who was this man?
Napoleon Bonaparte was born in 1769 on the French 
island of Corsica, not far from the coast of Italy. He was one of fourteen children. As 
a boy, Napoleon loved to play soldiers with his brothers. When he was old enough, 
his parents sent him to military school to learn how to become a real soldier. After 
he completed his training at the military school, Napoleon beca me an officer in the 
French army.
Four years later, in 1789, there was a sudden and violent chang e in France. Tired of 
paying heavy taxes so the king and his nobles could live in lux ury, poor and middle-
class people started a revolution. They executed the king and queen and many of their 
royal friends and then declared France a republic where all peo ple were to pay taxes 
according to their wealth. 
When the rulers of other European countries heard what happened  in France, they 


=== PAGE 138 ===

English: Grade 11 131
thought they, too, would lose control over their countries. Austria and Britain went to 
war with the new republic of France. Napoleon was a brilliant o fficer and was only 
twenty-seven years old when he was made Commander-in-Chief of t he French army 
in Italy. He won one victory after another, defeating the Austrians in eighteen battles. 
Then he moved his army to Egypt to stop the British trade route  to India. He won a 
victory over the Egyptians in 1798 at the Battle of the Pyramid s. In 1799, his troops 
in Egypt discovered the Rosetta Stone, an important object whic h helped people to 
understand ancient Egyptian writing for the first time. Napoleon had with him scholars 
from many fields who wanted to set up schools in Egypt. One group of scholars studied 
the pyramids and started the science of Egyptology. However, th e British destroyed 
Napoleon's ships and he lost the Rosetta stone to them. Then Na poleon decided to 
return to France.
When Napoleon returned to France, he was appointed first consul. The French needed 
a strong ruler at this time, and Napoleon was one. He became co nsul for life in 1802, 
and in 1804, Napoleon declared himself emperor of France. The P ope came from 
Rome to perform the 
  ceremony. Napoleon, richly dressed, listened to the service. 
Then Napoleon took the crown before the Pope could take it, and he put it on his own 
head. He did this to show that he got the crown because of his wisdom and military 
skill; he was not simply given the honour by the Pope.
Soon afterward, Napoleon made himself master of almost all of Europe. He conquered 
Austria in 1805 and Prussia in 1806. Then he formed an alliance  with Russia, and he 
made one of his brothers the king of Spain and another brother king of Holland.
In France, he ruled wisely and well, and he restored law and order after the revolution. 
He reorganized the French government and the Bank of France. He  built many fine 
roads and improved the old ones. He turned Paris into a beautiful city with wide streets, 
fine bridges, and beautiful buildings and monuments, such as th e Arc de Triomphe. 
More important still, he improved the laws. To this day, his Na poleonic Code is 
the foundation of European law, as well as of laws in Central a nd South America 
and Quebec in Canada. Napoleon wrote the Code's original 2,281 articles himself, 
although he was completely self-taught in legal matters. The Co de created a legal 
system in which all citizens were equal. It was so clearly writ ten that it could be read 
and understood by ordinary people at a time when all laws were written in Latin and 
understood by only a few.
Napoleon was a genius as an army commander. He conquered the hu ge Austrian 
Empire and ruled Italy, Switzerland, and Germany. He had the la rgest empire seen in 

=== PAGE 139 ===

 English: Grade 11 132
Europe since the days of the ancient Romans. The only country h e could not defeat 
was Britain, losing to the British in 1805 in the Battle of Tra falgar. Then, in 1812, 
Napoleon made his biggest mistake by invading Russia. He entere d Moscow, but he 
found that nearly all the people had left. There were fires all  over the city, and most 
of it was destroyed. With no place to house his soldiers and no food for them to eat in 
the bitter Russian winter, Napoleon had no choice but to retrea t. Napoleon lost half 
a million men in Russia. When he was finally defeated, he was s ent to the island of 
Elba in the Mediterranean. By 1814, one million Frenchmen were dead. Napoleon was 
humiliated.
After ten months in Elba, Napoleon escaped, went back to France, and declared himself 
emperor again. He ruled for 100 days. In the meantime, the Euro peans gathered their 
armies to end his rule. The combined armies, led by the British  Duke of Wellington, 
defeated Napoleon at Waterloo in 1815. After this, he was sent to the island of St. 
Helena in the Atlantic Ocean, where he died six years later at age fifty-two. We do 
not know what Napoleon died of exactly. Some doctors argued that he died of cancer; 
others say he was poisoned.
Napoleon was a military genius and had a brilliant mind. He fou ght many wars and 
thought there would not be peace in Europe until the continent was under one ruler – 
himself. Perhaps Napoleon would have an even greater ruler had he not been driven 
by his love of power.
Milada Broukal
 Ways with words  
A. Choose the correct meaning of the underlined word.
a. Many portraits of Napoleon show him with his right hand plac ed inside his 
coat.
i.  shape ii.  hairstyle iii.  sketch iv. movement
b. Napoleon won one victory after another, defeating the Austri ans in eighteen 
battles.
i. beating ii. joining iii.  fighting iv.  directing
c. Portrait painters thought this pose made men look more digni fied.
i. good-looking ii.  young iii. intelligent iv. energetic
d. They announced France a republic.
i. officially declared ii. informally decided

=== PAGE 140 ===

English: Grade 11 133
ii. put into practice iv. voted into law
e. Napoleon conquered Austria in 1805.
i. lost   ii. tried to control
iii. triumphed over iv. attacked
f. There was no place to house his soldiers in the bitter Russi an winter.
i. difficult ii. cold iii. dark iv. empty
g. Napoleon was humiliated when he was defeated.
i. tortured ii. punished iii. confused iv. shamed
B. Guess the meanings to these words from the text. Check in yo ur 
dictionary and make sentences of your own.
violent    execute     ancient     alliance    brilliant    genius    consul    invading
C. Look at the compound noun phrase Commander-in-Chief as used in 
this sentence from the text.
Napoleon was only twenty-seven years old when he was made Comma nder-in-
Chief of the French army in Italy.
D. Find the meanings of the following noun phrases and use them  in 
sentences.  
Vice-President Editor-in-chief Deputy Editor-in-Chief Deputy-Ma yor
Joint-secretary Under-secretary Deputy-Prime Minister Vice-Chan cellor
Attorney-general Ex-president Sub-editor co-author
 Comprehension 
Answer these questions.
a. Where was Napoleon from?
b. Why did poor and middle-class people declare France a republ ic?
c. When did Napoleon declare himself emperor of France?
d. What did he do when he ruled France?
e. Which countries did he rule when he was the emperor?
f. What was the main cause of his destruction? 
g. How did his rule as emperor end in Europe?
h. How could Napoleon have been an even greater ruler?

=== PAGE 141 ===

 English: Grade 11 134
 Critical thinking 
a. What can be the qualities of a great leader? Can a great lea der remain in power 
for long in a country? Discuss. 
b, The 16 th president of the USA, Abraham Lincoln said democracy is government 
of the people for the people and by the people. Do you think it  is perfectly 
applicable in the present context of Nepal? Explain. 
Writing
a. Write an essay on Power and Politics in about 500 words.
b. Write a couple of paragraphs about a national hero who fough t bravely in the 
Anglo-Nepal War.
Grammar
may, might, must, can’t
A. Study the following sentences.
a. She may/might be in France.
b. You've had a long journey. You must be tired.
c. Niraj can't be in Gorkha - I saw him this morning.
 We use may or might to talk about the possibility of something in the 
present or in the future.
 We use must and can’t to express certainty in the present.
B. Fill in the blanks with may, must or can’t.
a. Matthew …… be at home. I can see his bike in front of his ho me.
b. They …… be coming tomorrow.
c. She …… speak French very well. She's only lived in Paris for two weeks. 
d. My key is not in my pocket or on my desk so it …… be in the drawer. 
e. I saw him yesterday. He …… be abroad.
f. You got the job? That's great. You …… be very delighted.
g. I …… finish it by tomorrow if I stay at work all night, but I'm not sure.
h. Somebody is knocking on the door. It …… be Sabina – she prom ised to 
come today.

=== PAGE 142 ===

English: Grade 11 135
C. Rewrite the following sentences using may/might, must or can’t.
Example: May be they went away.
 They may/might have gone away.
a. I’m sure he’s not going to the cinema today.
b. Perhaps she knows the answer.
c. I’m sure he has a car.
d. I doubt if it rains later on.
e. Perhaps she wants to be alone.
f. I’m sure Harina is in her office.
Listening
A. Look at the picture and answer these questions. 
a. Do you know the man in the picture?
b. What is he famous for?
B. Now, listen to the audio and tick (√) the correct 
answer.
a. Who is the speaker addressing to?
i.  working men ii. women iii. job holders iv.  American citize ns
b. Why did people vote the speaker?
i. to complete the task ahead ii. to win the election
iii. to support him iv. to help democracy
c. Why do parents remain awake after their children fall asleep ?
i. to take care of their children ii. to manage money for famil y 
iii. thinking about family matters iv.  to find new jobs
d. How long will it take them in the process of remaking Americ a?
i.  one year ii.  many years iii.  one term iv. in short time
e. At what point will the speaker be more serious to respond to  people’s 
voice?
i. when he becomes president ii.  when he is honest 
iii.  when people agree him iv.  when there are differences in opinions 
f. Which of the following ideals doesn’t the Republican Party h ave?
i. national unity ii.  maturity
iii. individual liberty iv. self-reliance


=== PAGE 143 ===

 English: Grade 11 136
C. Find more about Barack Obama and write any five things about  his 
life. 
Speaking
Expressing certainty and probability
A. Study the following conversation
A: What are you going to do after grade 12?
B: I will study English literature at the university.
A: Are you sure about that?
B: I’m absolutely sure.
A: Which university will you join?
B:  Maybe Tribhuvan University.
A: So, you’re not quite certain, are you?
B: No, I’m not sure yet. 
B. Work in pairs. Answer each question with may, might or maybe. Add 
one or two more sentences.
Example: A: What are you going to do tonight?
 B: I don’t know. I may go out with friends. Or I might stay at  home.
a. What are you going to do after your lesson?
b. What are you going to have for dinner?
c, What are you going to do next weekend?
d. When are you going to finish your homework?
e. How are you going to get home?
f. Where are you going to celebrate your holiday?
Project Work
Collect information about one of the following brave Nepalese warriors. Write a short 
description of the person based on the information you have col lected and present to 
the class.
Kalu Pandey,  Bhakti Thapa, Bhimsen Thapa, Balbhadra Kunwar, Amar Singh 
Thapa

=== PAGE 144 ===

English: Grade 11 137
Unit 15  War and Peace
“If everyone fought for their own convictions, there would be no war.” - Leo Tolstoy
Reading
Shall there be Peace?
 Before you read 
a. What is war?
b. What happens if there is war in country? Describe its conseq uences. 
c. Describe a devastating war in the world history.  
Now read the following essay about war in the hope of peace.
Only recently, Wilson and Lloyd George proclaimed 
their unswerving will to fight on till final victory. In the 
Italian Chamber the Socialist Mergari was treated like a 
madman because he had spoken a few natural, human 
words. And today, with what wooden self-righteousness 
a Wolff dispatch denies the rumour of a new German 
peace proposal: “Germany and its allies have not the 
slightest reason for repeating their magnanimous offer 
of peace.”
In other words, everything goes on as before, and if anywhere a peaceful blade of grass 
tries to pierce the ground, a military boot is quick to trample it.
Yet at the same time, we read that peace negotiations have begu n in Brest-Litovsk, 
that Herr Kühlmann has opened the session with a reference to t he significance of 
Christmas and has spoken, in the words of the Gospel, of peace on earth. If he means 
what he says, if he has even the faintest understanding of thos e tremendous words, 
peace is inevitable. Unfortunately, our experience of Bible quotations in the mouths of 
statesmen has not thus far been encouraging. 
For many days now, the eyes of the world have been focused upon two places. In those 
two places, it is widely felt, the destinies of nations are com ing to a head, the future 
beckoning, and disaster threatening. With bated breath the world is looking eastward, 
to the peace negotiations in Brest-Litovsk. And at the same tim e it is watching the 
western front in dire anguish, for everyone feels, everyone kno ws that, short of a 


=== PAGE 145 ===

 English: Grade 11 138
miracle, the most dreadful disaster that has ever befallen men is there impending: the 
bitterest, bloodiest, most ruthless and appalling battle of all time. 
Everyone knows it and everyone, with the exception of a few sanguine political orators 
and war profiteers, is trembling at the thought. Concerning the  outcome of this mass 
slaughter, opinions and hopes vary. In both camps, there is a m inority who seriously 
believe in a decisive victory. But one thing that no one endowed with a vestige of good 
sense can believe is that the ideal, humanitarian aims, which f igure so prominently in 
the speeches of all our statesmen, will be achieved. The bigger, the bloodier, the more 
destructive these final battles of the World War prove to be, the less will be accomplished 
for the future, the less hope there will be of appeasing hatreds and rivalries, or of doing 
away with the idea that political aims can be attained by the c riminal instrumentality 
of war. If one camp should indeed achieve final victory (and th is purpose is the one 
justification offered by the leaders in their incendiary speech es), then what we abhor 
as “militarism” will have won out. If in their secret heart the partisans of war mean so 
much as a single word of what they have been saying about war a ims, the absurdity, 
the utter futility of all their arguments staggers the imagination.
Can a new massacre of inconceivable scope be justified by such a jumble of hopeless 
fallacies, of mutually contradictory hopes and plans? While all  people with even the 
slightest experience of war and its suffering are awaiting the outcome of the Russian 
peace negotiations in prayer and expectation, while all of us a re moved to love and 
gratitude for the Russians because they, first among nations, h ave attacked the war at 
its root and resolved to end it, while half the world is going hungry and useful human 
effort has been halved where it has not ceased altogether—at such a time, preparations 
are being made in France for what we shudder even to name, a mass slaughter which is 
expected to decide, but will not decide, the outcome of the war, for the final senseless 
mustering of heroism and patience, the final hideous triumph of dynamite and machines 
over human life and the human spirit!
In view of this situation, it is our duty, the one sacred duty of every man of good will 
on earth, not to sheathe ourselves in indifference and let things take their course, but to 
do our utmost to prevent this final catastrophe.
Yes, you say, but what can we do? If we were statesmen and mini sters, we would do 
our bit, but, as it is, we have no power!
This is the easy reaction to all responsibility—until it becomes too pressing. If we turn 
to the politicians and leaders, they too shake their heads and invoke their helplessness. 

=== PAGE 146 ===

English: Grade 11 139
We cannot sit back and put the blame on them.
To blame are the inertia and cowardice of each one of us, our obstinacy and reluctance 
to think. In response to the excellent Mergari, Sonnino refused  to say “anything that 
might give aid and comfort to the enemy”; the Wolff dispatch I have just mentioned 
declares that Germany has “not the slightest reason” to make an other move in behalf 
of peace. But every day we ourselves give evidence of the same attitude. We accept 
things as they come, we rejoice in victories, we deplore the lo sses in our own camp, 
we tacitly accept war as an instrument of politics.
Alas, every nation and every family, every single individual in  all Europe and far 
beyond it, has more than enough “reason” to give his utmost in behalf of the peace for 
which we all yearn. Only a vanishing minority of men truly want the war to go on—and 
beyond a doubt they deserve our contempt and sincerest hatred. No one else, only a 
very few morbid fanatics or unscrupulous criminals are in favour of this war, and yet—
inconceivable as it seems—it goes on and on, with both sides arming indefatigably for 
the allegedly final holocaust in the West!
This is possible only because we are all too lazy, too easygoing, too cowardly. It is possible 
only because somewhere in our secret hearts we approve or toler ate the war, because 
we throw all the resources of our minds and souls to the winds and let the misguided 
machines roll on! That is what the political leaders do, and what the armies do, but we 
ourselves, the onlookers, are no better. We all know that we can stop the war if we want 
to in earnest. We know that whenever men have felt an action to be truly necessary they 
have performed it against all resistance. We have looked on with admiration and beating 
hearts as the Russians laid down their arms and manifested thei r will to make peace.
There is no person on earth that has not been profoundly moved in its heart and 
conscience by this marvelous drama. But at the same moment we reject the obligations 
such feelings imply. Every politician in the world is all in favour of revolution, reason, 
and the laying down of arms—but only in the enemy camp, not in his own! If we are 
in earnest, we can stop the war. Once again the Russians have exemplified the ancient 
and holy doctrine that the weak can be mightiest. Why does no o ne follow them? 
Why do parliaments and cabinets everywhere content themselves with the same dreary 
drivel, the same day-to-day trivialities, why do they nowhere r ise up to champion a 
great idea, the only idea that matters today? Why do they favour the self determination 
of nations only when they themselves hope to profit? Why are people still taken in by 
the false idealism of official phrasemongers? It has been said that every nation has the 

=== PAGE 147 ===

 English: Grade 11 140
rulers it wants and deserves. May be so. We Europeans at all events have the bloodiest 
and most ruthless of all rulers: war. Is that what we want and deserve?
No, we don’t want it. We all want the opposite. Apart from a small number of profiteers, 
no one wants this shameful and dismal state of affairs. What th en can we do? We can 
bestir ourselves! We can take every opportunity to manifest our readiness for peace. We 
can desist from such useless provocations as the above-mentioned Wolff dispatch, and 
stop talking like Sonnino. At the present juncture a slight hum iliation, a concession, 
a humane impulse can do us no harm! How, when we have befouled ourselves so 
thoroughly with blood, can we worry about petty national vanities?
Now is the time to oust those statesmen who conceive foreign policy in terms of self-
seeking national programmes, who ignore the cry of mankind! Why  wait until their 
stupidity has shed the blood of more millions?
All of us—great and small, belligerents and neutrals—we must no t close our ears to 
the dire warning of this hour, the threat of such unthinkable horrors. Peace is at hand! 
As a thought, a desire, a suggestion, as a power working in sil ence, it is everywhere, 
in every heart. If each one of us opens his heart to it, if each one of us firmly resolves 
to serve the cause of peace, to communicate his thoughts and in timations of peace—
if every man of good will decides to devote himself exclusively  for a little while to 
clearing away the obstacles, the barriers to peace, then we shall have peace.
If that is done we shall all have helped to bring it about, we shall all feel worthy of the 
great tasks it will impose—whereas hitherto we have all been po ssessed by a feeling 
of shared guilt.
Hermann Hesse
NOTES
Wilson and Lloyd George: Woodrow Wilson, the President of America, and David 
Lloyd George, the Prime Minister of Britain wanted to stop a wa r ever happening 
again to establish peace after the World War I, but they did not get on well
Brest-Litovsk: The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was a peace treaty signed in 1918 between 
Russia and Germany that ended Russia's participation in World War I
Herr Kühlmann:  Herr Kühlmann (1873-1948) was a German diplomat and 
industrialist. From 6 August 1917 to 9 July 1918, he served as Germany's Secretary of 
State for Foreign Affairs.

=== PAGE 148 ===

English: Grade 11 141
 Ways with words 
A. Match the words on the left side with their meanings on the right. 
a. proclaim i. generous or forgiving
b. unswerving ii. distress
c.  magnanimous iii. dreadful
d.  trample iv. steady or constant
e. tremendous v. declare
f.  inevitable vi. upcoming
g. dire vii. huge
h.  anguish viii. pitiless
i. impending ix. unavoidable
j.  ruthless x. crush
B. Fill in the blanks with the suitable word from the list give n.
appalling     sanguine    slaughter    absurdity    futility    reluctance     bestir
a. The soldiers suffer …… injuries during the attack.
b. She is …… about prospects for the economic development of th e country.
c. Innocent people get unexpected …… in the war.
d. The crowd laughed at the …… of the singer’s behaviour.
e. The intellectuals should be worried about the horror and …… of war.
f. He sensed her …… to continue the work.
g. They …… themselves at the first light of morning.
 Comprehension 
Answer these questions.
a. Why was the Italian Socialist Mergari treated like a madman?
b. Can political aims be attained by the criminal instrumentali ty of war? If 
yes, how?
c. Which hopes and plans were said to be mutually contradictory ?
d. What can be the sacred duty of every man of good will on ear th?

=== PAGE 149 ===

 English: Grade 11 142
e. Is it good to tacitly accept war as an instrument of politic s? If not, what 
else should be done?
f. How can we stop war in the world?
g. What is the main message of this essay?
 Critical thinking 
a. Are warmongers the greatest enemies for peace? What do you w ant to suggest to 
them?
b. The Nobel Prize Winner American novelist John Steinbeck (190 2-1968) once 
said, “All war is a symptom of man's failure as a thinking animal.” Do you agree 
with the novelist? Why?
c. Does any war end all wars and bring lasting peace to the wor ld? Discuss.
d. Why do you think countries go in wars even though they have their own 
boundaries? 
Writing
Write essays in about 500 words on the following topics.
a. War and peace
b. Responsive youths for peace and prosperity 
Grammar
Sentence functions
A. Do you know the parts of a sentence? If not, look at this se ntence.
The fat man painted the door green last week.
In this sentence, the fat man → Subject (S)
 painted → Verb (V)
 the door   →  Object (O)
 green →  Complement (C)
 last week   →     Adverbial (A)
B. Divide the following sentences into different parts.
Example: The man will buy a pen next week.
   The man – will buy – a pen – next week.
     Subject  +  Verb   +   Object + Adverbial

=== PAGE 150 ===

English: Grade 11 143
a. The children are playing now.
b. Srijana will be reading a story.
c. Bimala is a very beautiful girl.
d. She usually wears glasses.
e. They elected him President.
f. Rabin is laughing.
g. He has a big house in Butwal.
h. The man who lives next door is a professor.
i. Her uncle has been living in Kathmandu for fifteen years.
j. The girl with long hair asked me a question last week.
Listening
A. Look at the picture and answer these 
questions. 
a. Who are these people?
b. Why do you think they are gathered?
B. Listen to the recording and mark True or False. 
a. Chris is a reporter. 
b. It is the first day of protest. 
c. The people want a big new road coming through the area.
d. The police confirmed some arrests of people.
e. The construction work has already begun in the area.
C. Listen to the recording again and answer these questions. 
a. Where is the reporter reporting from? 
b. What is the plan that people refuse? 
c. Why did they prefer the railroad to highway? 
d. In what condition will the people stop that protest? 


=== PAGE 151 ===

 English: Grade 11 144
D. Have you seen or experienced any event of protest? Discuss.
Speaking
Encouraging/discouraging
A. Study these expressions of encouraging and discouraging.
Encouraging Discouraging
Come on!
Go on!
Keep it up!
You can do it!
Well done!/Great!
You’re doing great/fine!
That’s fine/good/all right.
You’re doing very well!
It’s a good idea.
Give up!
Don’t bother with it.
Don’t waste your time.
It’s not worth the effort.
Why do you want to do that?
It’s not a good idea.
B. Talk to each other how useful these experiences might be in preparing 
school student for their future life. Use the expressions of encouraging 
and discouraging in your conversation.
Making a circle 
of friends
Learning about 
money management
Doing volunteer work
How are these useful in 
preparing the students for 
their future life?
Choosing  a subject of 
specialization
Working part time
C. Role-play the following situations. Use the expression of en couraging 
and discouraging. 
a. Your best friend feels bad because he/she recently did poorl y on a test.
b. You are teaching your sister how to play tennis. 
c. You are in a café with your friend who is thinking of taking  driving lessons.
Project Work
Search the photos from different sources that show devastating effects of war. Also 
search the photos that show the effects of peace. Now make a picture story book with 
captions about the bad effects of war and good effects of peace.

=== PAGE 152 ===

English: Grade 11 145
Unit 16 Critical Thinking
“What is a friend? A single soul dwelling in two bodies.” -Aristotle
Reading
What Is the Soul?
 Before you read 
a. Which one do you think is primary: body or soul? Why?
b. “A circle has no beginning”?  Do you agree or disagree with the statement? 
Explain.
Now read the following essay about the existence of the soul in  the materialist 
world.
One of the most painful circumstances of recent advances in sci ence is that each one 
makes us know less than we thought we did. When I was young we all knew, or 
thought we knew, that a man consists of a soul and a body; that the body is in time and 
space, but the soul is in time only. Whether the soul survives death was a matter as to 
which opinions might differ, but that there is a soul was thought to be indubitable. As 
for the body, the plain man of course considered its existence self-evident, and so did 
the man of science, but the philosopher was apt to analyse it a way after one fashion 
or another, reducing it usually to ideas in the mind of the man  who had the body and 
anybody else who happened to notice him. The philosopher, howev er, was not taken 
seriously, and science remained comfortably materialistic, even  in the hands of quite 
orthodox scientists.
Nowadays these fine old simplicities are lost: physicists assure us that there is no such 
thing as matter, and psychologists assure us that there is no s uch thing as mind. This 
is an unprecedented occurrence. Who ever heard of a cobbler say ing that there was 
no such thing as boots, or a tailor maintaining that all men ar e really naked? Yet that 
would have been no odder than what physicists and certain psych ologists have been 
doing. To begin with the latter, some of them attempt to reduce everything that seems 
to be mental activity to an activity of the body. There are, however, various difficulties 
in the way of reducing mental activity to physical activity. I do not think we can yet 
say with any assurance whether these difficulties are or are no t insuperable. What we 
can say, on the basis of physics itself, is that what we have hitherto called our body is 
really an elaborate scientific construction not corresponding t o any physical reality. 

=== PAGE 153 ===

 English: Grade 11 146
The modern would-be materialist thus finds himself in a curious  position, for, while 
he may with a certain degree of success reduce the activities o f the mind to those of 
the body, he cannot explain away the fact that the body itself is merely a convenient 
concept invented by the mind. We find ourselves thus going roun d and round in a 
circle: mind is an emanation of body, and body is an invention of mind. Evidently this 
cannot be quite right, and we have to look for something that is neither mind nor body, 
out which both can spring.
Let us begin with the body. The plain man thinks that material objects must certainly 
exist, since they are evident to the senses. Whatever else may be doubted, it is certain 
that anything you can bump into must be real; this is the plain man's metaphysic. This 
is all very well, but the physicist comes along and shows that you never bump into 
anything: even when you run your hand along a stone wall, you d o not really touch 
it. When you think you touch a thing, there are certain electrons and protons, forming 
part of your body, which are attracted and repelled by certain electrons and protons in 
the thing you think you are touching, but there is no actual contact. The electrons and 
protons in your body, becoming agitated by nearness to the other electrons and protons 
are disturbed, and transmit a disturbance along your nerves to the brain; the effect in 
the brain is what is necessary to your sensation of contact, and by suitable experiments 
this sensation can be made quite deceptive. The electrons and p rotons themselves, 
however, are only crude first approximations, a way of collecting into a bundle either 
trains of waves or the statistical probabilities of various different kinds of events. Thus 
matter has become altogether too ghostly to be used as an adequ ate stick with which 
to beat the mind. Matter in motion, which used to seem so unquestionable, turns out to 
be a concept quite inadequate for the needs of physics.
Nevertheless modern science gives no indication whatever of the existence of the soul 
or mind as an entity; indeed the reasons for disbelieving in it  are very much of the 
same kind as the reasons for disbelieving in matter. Mind and m atter were something 
like the lion and the unicorn fighting for the crown; the end o f the battle is not the 
victory of one or the other, but the discovery that both are only heraldic inventions. The 
world consists of events, not of things that endure for a long time and have changing 
properties. Events can be collected into groups by their causal  relations. If the causal 
relations are of one sort, the resulting group of events may be called a physical object, 
and if the causal relations are of another sort, the resulting group may be called a 
mind. Any event that occurs inside a man's head will belong to groups of both kinds; 
considered as belonging to a group of one kind, it is a constit uent of his brain, and 

=== PAGE 154 ===

English: Grade 11 147
considered as belonging to a group of the other kind, it is a constituent of his mind.
Thus, both mind and matter are merely convenient ways of organizing events. There can 
be no reason for supposing that either a piece of mind or a piece of matter is immortal. 
The sun is supposed to be losing matter at the rate of millions  of tons a minute. The 
most essential characteristic of mind is memory, and there is n o reason whatever to 
suppose that the memory associated with a given person survives  that person's death. 
Indeed there is every reason to think the opposite, for memory is clearly connected with 
a certain kind of brain structure, and since this structure decays at death, there is every 
reason to suppose that memory also must cease. Although metaphy sical materialism 
cannot be considered true, yet emotionally the world is pretty much the same as I 
would be if the materialists were in the right. I think the opponents of materialism have 
always been actuated by two main desires: the first to prove that the mind is immortal, 
and the second to prove that the ultimate power in the universe  is mental rather than 
physical. In both these respects, I think the materialists were in the right. Our desires, 
it is true, have considerable power on the earth's surface; the  greater part of the land 
on this planet has a quite different aspect from that which it would have if men had not 
utilized it to extract food and wealth. But our power is very strictly limited. We cannot 
at present do anything whatever to the sun or moon or even to the interior of the earth, 
and there is not the faintest reason to suppose that what happe ns in regions to which 
our power does not extend has any mental causes. That is to say, to put the matter in a 
nutshell, there is no reason to think that except on the earth's surface anything happens 
because somebody wishes it to happen. And since our power on th e earth's surface is 
entirely dependent upon the sun, we could hardly realize any of  our wishes if the sun 
grew could. It is of course rash to dogmatize as to what scienc e may achieve in the 
future. We may learn to prolong human existence longer than now  seems possible, 
but if there is any truth in modern physics, more particularly in the second law of 
thermodynamics, we cannot hope that the human race will continu e forever. Some 
people may find this conclusion gloomy, but if we are honest with ourselves, we shall 
have to admit that what is going to happen many millions of yea rs hence has no very 
great emotional interest for us here and now. And science, whil e it diminishes our 
cosmic pretensions, enormously increases our terrestrial comfort. That is why, in spite 
of the horror of the theologians, science has on the whole been tolerated.
Bertrand Russell

=== PAGE 155 ===

 English: Grade 11 148
 Ways with words 
A. The words in the crossword puzzle are from the text. Find th em from 
the text to solve the puzzle based on the meaning clues given below.
Across Down
3. emergence or origination 1. unquestionable, impossible to do ubt
5. impossible to achieve or overcom 2. never done or known befo re
7. appropriate or suitable 4. obviously or clearly
8. force back 6. moved with a violent, irregular action
10. up to now 9. conservative
B. Find the words from the text that mean the following. The fi rst letter 
is given.
a. misleading or illusionary (d…………)
b. in a natural state; not yet processed or refined (c………….)

=== PAGE 156 ===

English: Grade 11 149
c. a mystical horse like animal with a single straight horn pro jecting from its 
forehead (u………)
d. never dying or decaying ( i……….)
e. come to an end; stop (c………..)
f. to activate or put into motion (a…………)
 Comprehension 
Answer these questions.
a. What’s the difference between the body and the soul?
b. What do you understand by the psychologists’ saying that there is no such 
thing as mind?
c. How can a mental activity be reduced to a physical activity?
d. How are mind and body related?
e. What is the relation between mind and memory? Does memory su rvive a 
person's death?
f. How is our power on the earth's surface entirely dependent u pon the sun?
 Critical thinking 
a. Do you believe that soul really exists? Write your arguments  in support of your 
answer.
b. If you want to change your body, you first have to change yo ur mind. Discuss.
Writing
Write critically on the given topics. 
a. The existence of God
b. Religion influences ethics and morality
Grammar
A. Notice the use of used to in the following text.
I was a young girl in the 1960s. My friends and I used to do a lot of things which 
shocked our parents. We used to do things our mothers never did . We used to cut our 
hair, we used to wear short skirts. We used to sing songs but did not use to dance. 
Now, rewrite the following sentences using ‘used to’. You can make an affirmative/
negative statement or a question.

=== PAGE 157 ===

 English: Grade 11 150
a. I/live in a flat when I was a child.
b. She/love eating chocolate but now she hates it.
c. He/go to fishing in the summer?
d. My sister/play tennis when she was at school.
e. He/play football every weekend?
f. My grandfather/speak five languages.
g. I/not hate school from the beginning.
h. You/live in Kathmandu?
i. He/play Dandibiyo when he was a small child.
j. She/wear a frock when she was small but nowadays she wears j eans.
B. Write a short paragraph describing your past habits.
Listening
A. Look at the picture and answer these questions.
a. What are these people doing?
b. What things do you like around the sea?
B. Listen to the recording and circle the best answer.
a. Jessica is speaking about ……
i.her  mother ii. her father iii. movie director
b. She has her first memory of her father when she was 
i. 3-4 years old ii. 5-6 years old iii. 10 years old
c. Her father used to love ……
i. reading scripts ii. taking phone calls iii. painting
d. Her father used to work …… 
i. on a boat ii. in Hollywood iii. in a painting shop

=== PAGE 158 ===

English: Grade 11 151
C. Listen to the recording again and mark True or False. 
a. Her mother spoke before Jessica.
b. Jessica doesn't like oceans. 
c. Her father would be happy on the big sails of the boat.
d. They are publishing a picture book this year.   
D. Do you have any special hobbies and interests? Discuss.
Speaking
Comparing past and present habits
A. Study the following.
A: Did you use to watch cartoons when you were a small child?
B: Yes, I used to watch Tom and Jerry, but nowadays I watch TV serials.
B. Work in pairs. Ask and answer about your past and present ha bits 
based on the following actions.
swimming playing the guitar
visiting relatives going fishing
playing Kapardi drawing pictures
listening to music having long hair
going to the cinema sleeping earlier
C. Work in pairs. Talk about past and present lifestyles of peo ple in your 
society.
Project Work
Find the essay Is the soul immortal? by Swami Vivekananda from the online sources. 
Critically review the essay and write its summary and present it to the class.

=== PAGE 159 ===

 English: Grade 11 152
Unit 17 Globalisation and Diaspora
“Globalisation is a strategy of liberalisation that becomes an economic nightmare for 
the poor.”  - Anonymous
Reading
What Lost Identity? The Diaspora and Globalisation
 Before you read 
a. Why do you think people leave their home countries?
b. Do they have their cultural identity in other countries?
c, What happens when one’s identity is lost? 
d. How is culture globalised?
Now read the following article about identity loss for the immigrants.
Most of the 5 million 
Palestinians are refugees. More 
than two million live in Western 
Europe and North America. 
They left Palestine and the 
refugee camps where they were 
denied basic human rights to 
find a better life and better 
economic opportunities. Most 
North African Arabs (Egyptians, 
Moroccans, Tunisians, and 
Algerians) left their home countries to look for a better econo mic life. However, 
Syrian and Lebanese nationals left their countries not only to improve their economic 
situation but also to escape from the ravages of the ongoing conflicts there.
There are those who fear the loss of cultural identity when confronted with the process 
of cultural assimilation. Personally, I believe that no institu tion, government, group 
or people can clinically separate the young generations from th e huge waves of 
technological advancement that shape and form this global culture, which is, after all, 
part of our new global identity. We are living in the 21
st century where social media, 
street journalism and global trans-national corporations partic ipate in providing a 
catalyst for the new dynamics of global culture formation, quite apart from the issue of 


=== PAGE 160 ===

English: Grade 11 153
identity which can be defined in terms of religion, culture or language. This signifies 
that we should not confuse cultural identity with global culture.
However, moving from one side of the world to the other can be an economic 
challenge for newcomers and host nations alike in places like W estern Europe and 
North America.  When the immigrants arrive, the host country ne eds to integrate 
them into the labour market, with the prospect of achieving a b etter life for them and 
facilitating their contribution to the economy. This cannot hap pen in a one-step or 
one-shop integration programme; it needs time, starting from le arning the language, 
integrating culturally with finally, integration into the labou r market.  Although in 
the short-term this strategy may prove costly for the governmen t, in the long run, it 
will make a positive contr ibution to the economy. Immigrants, however, may find 
themselves ignored or isolated by society, even though society may see itself as open 
and immigrant-friendly.  This can be seen in the housing situat ion where immigrants 
can rent only from housing agencies and in specific areas. Smal l enclaves in cities 
where immigrants are concentrated begin to spring up. Take Rose ngard in Malmo, 
Sweden, for instance, where most immigrants can be found and the crime rate is among 
the highest in the country. Or Lavapies, a central historic nei ghbourhood in Madrid, 
Spain now home to a high concentration of immigrants from China , Bangladesh and 
the Middle East. Enclaves such as these can be costly to the go vernment and to the 
immigrants themselves as life in these neighbourhoods often run s parallel to official 
society and its culture, and integration is not truly achieved.
Many immigrants have started their own businesses in their new homes. Twenty years 
ago, you could hardly find Palestinian hummus or falafel in any  European markets. 
Today, there are small entrepreneurs who have set up shops to s ell Arabic, Hindi, 
African, Latin American foods and other products, and there is an increasing amount of 
trade between these countries.  Spice exports from India to Saudi Arabia has increased 
the total sum of economic trade to 80 billion Saudi Riyals.  Th is is not because of 
the sheer quality of Indian spices, but because of the numbers of Indians who live in 
Saudi Arabia- naturally for economic reasons.  Trade between Tu rkey and Germany 
has reached the 25-billion-euro mark and the number of German t ourists to Turkey 
is an estimated 4 million. This illustrates how the existence o f immigrants can foster 
economics at different magnitudes of scale.
Personally, I had the chance to meet many immigrants who were all willing to integrate 
in the Swedish and Spanish societies where they live. Admittedl y, there are many 
constraints at play, but these constraints are not related to any loss of identity.  In fact, 

=== PAGE 161 ===

 English: Grade 11 154
Western societies’ creation of immigrant enclaves enables neighbours to share similar 
identities, cultures, language and perhaps even religion.  This, however, has a negative 
effect in the long run, and it will be the second generation and the government who in 
the end will pay dearly. Integration programmes do not fail bec ause immigrants are 
unwilling to be part of the new society, but because society does not open its doors fully 
to allow them to integrate. Full integration could be costly at first, but at the end of the 
day, it is an investment in the future. Currently, many schools in Sweden are teaching 
Arabic as a second language for immigrants and provide students with halal food. Any 
argument about loss of identity in the West does not have a solid foundation.
Countless benefits come from integrating into society. It means that people will focus 
more on economic opportunities rather than concentrating their efforts on lamenting 
a so-called identity crisis. And it means they will become sens itised to the norms and 
standards of the new society – its garbage collection, its traf fic lights, its highway 
code etc. – and start to adopt new ways of thinking. The new ge neration will have 
the opportunity of boarding the ship of civilisation and develo pment that Arabs have 
lost a long time ago. They will have equal opportunities in lea rning, engagement 
and self-esteem. Afterwards, they can be a solid bridge between  the two cultures or 
religions – of course, with mutual understanding. On the other hand, the receiving 
countries will enhance their economic opportunities where immig rants come from. 
The number of multinational corporations and businesses are inc reasing because of 
the increasing number of immigrants in the receiving countries.  This will boost an 
economic, political and cultural interaction between the two si des. Governments of 
Europe and North America should start their integration programmes by encouraging 
newcomers to establish their own businesses that link them to t heir homeland. This 
will make it easier to understand, smoothly integrate and contribute to the economy.
Finally, we must admit that if we do not run in concordance wit h global culture, it 
will eventually usurp us without our even knowing it. The cost of isolation and non-
convergence is higher and more damaging than integration. The fear of losing identity 
must be faced with positive interaction between newcomers and their hosting societies. 
In the end, most newcomers are guests and must leave a positive impression when they 
leave, or they are part of this society and they must adapt with it and build their future 
in conjunction with their new surroundings.
Abdalhadi Alijla

=== PAGE 162 ===

English: Grade 11 155
 Ways with words  
A. Choose the words from the box for the following meanings.
confront        refugee       ravage       assimilation      enclave     usurp
a. the severely damaging or destructive effects of something
b. someone forced to leave their country in order to escape war , persecution, or 
natural disaster
c. to face a difficult situation
d. take a position of power or importance illegally or by force
e. the process of becoming a part of a group, country, society,  etc.
f. an area within a larger territory whose inhabitants are cult urally or ethnically 
distinct
B. Collocation refers to words that are found together in spoke n and 
written language. Collocations can be either fixed, where it is difficult 
to replace one of the words with an alternative, or freer, allo wing for 
more choice of words. The most common types of collocation are:
Verb + noun accept responsibility
Adjective + noun ﬁ rm determination
Verb + adjective + noun make steady progress
Adverb + verb strongly recommend
Adverb + adjective completely useless
Adverb + adjective + noun totally unacceptable behaviour
Adjective + preposition accused of 
Noun + noun window frame
C. Fill in the gaps with the correct word from the brackets. 
a. I asked him if he was attending the ceremony and he …… his h ead 'no'. 
(shook/moved/ nodded) 
b. They made a horrible decision which caused …… damage to our company. 
(hopeless/ inflexible/irreparable)

=== PAGE 163 ===

 English: Grade 11 156
c. The leaders need to break down …… so as to create favorable environment 
in the nation. (barriers/obstacles/hindrances)
d. You ought to talk to the manager to ……the dispute. (solve/se ttle/clear up)
e. Perhaps this issue will not get much media …… (security/exam ination/
coverage)
f. This week is the first week of Joan as an in-charge. Everyth ing is running 
…… (smoothly/calmly/easily)
g. I haven't read the text thoroughly, but given a … glance. (f ast/quick/rapid)
 Comprehension 
Answer the following questions. 
a. Why did millions of Palestinians leave their country?
b. How is the global culture formed? Is cultural identity possi ble even in the 
global culture? Justify. 
c, Why can moving from one side of the world to the other be an  economic 
challenge for newcomers?
d. How can immigrants foster economy at different magnitudes of  scale in 
their new homes?
e. Can immigrants fully integrate in the new societies? Give re asons.
f. Mention any two benefits of integrating into a new society f or the 
immigrants.
g. Why should the immigrants run in concordance with global cul ture?
 Critical thinking 
a. Do you think that the local is globalised and the global is localised? Can there be 
the global culture as well? Give examples.
b. What is globalisation? Discuss the effects of globalization on traditional cultures.
c. Discuss the impacts of globalization on the process and prog ress of education in 
Nepal.

=== PAGE 164 ===

English: Grade 11 157
Writing
A. Look at the following news story.
RSS
 Kathmandu, Sept 10 :  The much 
awaited interstate petroleum pipeline 
project has been inaugurated today. 
Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli and 
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi 
jointly inaugurated the project from the 
respective countries.
A programme was organized at Singh 
Durbar for the PM Oli and at Hyderabad 
House for Indian PM Modi to switch on 
the project together as the inauguration 
via the video conference. With the 
inauguration, petroleum product has 
arrived in Amlekhgunj, Nepal from 
India's Motihari. The pipeline is the first 
cross border project in South Asia.    
For the first phase, diesel is brought and 
petrol and kerosene later. The Amlekhgunj-
Motihari stretch is 69.2 km long.
The pipeline supplies nearly 4,000 
kl petroleum product every day, the 
project said. With the cross border 
project in place, more than Rs 2 billion 
is saved which was earlier spent on it 
transportation.  
Similarly, as the import cost declined, 
the price of the petroleum products has 
been slashed by Nepal Oil Corporation. 
The NOC cut the price of diesel, petrol 
and kerosene by Rs 2 per litre. Of the total 
diesel consumed in the country, 70 percent 
is supplied from Amlekhgunj.    
A high level technical team including NOC 
Executive Director is at Amlekhgung in 
course of the project inauguration. The 
NOC and Indian Oil Corporation had 
agreed in 2004 to construct the interstate 
pipeline project. It was however stalled for 
a decade on various reasons.    
In August 2015, then Minister for Commerce 
and Supply, Sunil Bahadur Thapa, and his 
Indian counterpart Dharmendra Pradhan 
had signed for the construction of the 
project. Both Nepal and India had special 
interest on completion of the project.    
Similarly, PM Oli and the Indian PM Modi 
had jointly laid the foundation stone to the 
pipeline in New Delhi during Oli's visit to 
India.  
The project cost is 2.75 billion Indian 
currencies.    
The programme organized to inaugurate 
the project at Singha Durbar was attended 
by Cabinet members, secretaries of various 
ministries and high level officials of the 
government.  
(The Rising Nepal, 10 September 2019)
PM Oli, Indian PM Modi Jointly Inaugurate
Cross-Border Petroleum Pipeline

=== PAGE 165 ===

 English: Grade 11 158
B. Have you identified the following parts in the above news st ory?
Headline:  title of the news report
Byline:  who wrote the news article
Dateline:  where and when the report is written
Lead paragraph: expansion of the headline in one or two sentences, 
usually answering the questions: who? what? where? 
when? why? how?
Body paragraphs: greater detail of the event in chronological order, often 
in one, two or three paragraphs
C. Write a news story to be published in a newspaper about a lo cal 
festival/fair you have witnessed.
Grammar
Infinitive and gerund 
A. Study the following examples.
It didn't stop raining all day yesterday.
She promised to take me there.
It started raining. or It started to rain.
She stopped smoking three years ago.
It was hot, so we stopped to have a drink.
Verbs usually followed by 
–ing 
verbs that are usually followed by 
the infinitive.
Verbs followed 
by either form
stop, finish, imagine, 
suggest, recommend, avoid, 
mind, miss, risk, enjoy
decide, hope, offer, fail, agree, forget, 
manage, learn, afford, arrange, ask, 
expect, plan, promise, want, invite
start, begin, 
continue, 
bother
B. Complete each sentence using what/how/where/whether + one of these 
verbs:
apply     get   do    ride    use     go
a. Do you know …… to Rama’s house?
b. I don’t know …… for the job or not.

=== PAGE 166 ===

English: Grade 11 159
c. Have you decided …… for your picnic?
d. Can you show me …… this camera?
e. Ask Hari. He’ll tell you …… a bicycle.
f. I was really astonished. I didn’t know …… on the horse.
C. Paraphrase the following sentences using the verb in bracket s as in 
the example.
Example: She has lost her weight. (seem)
 She seems to have lost her weight.
a. Mahesh forgets closing the windows. (tend)
b. Your car has broken down. (appear)
c. Ashika is worried about her exam. (seem)
d. They have developed the theory. (claim)
e. He’s enjoying his new job. (pretend)
Listening
A. Look at the picture and guess answers 
to these questions. 
a. Where are the people going? Why?
b. Why do people go abroad?
c. What are the effects of globalization?
B. Listen to the recording and complete the following text with  correct 
words.
Globalisation is not an …… topic to talk about. Development in …… have made 
transport and communication easier. This way people and countries can exchange thing 
with each other in a way that is less …… . When two companies p roduce the same 
things, they have with each other. Globalisation has contribute d to enable a company 
to sell its products at a …… because the products were produced for less. There is not 
only the exchange of products but also the exchange of services , knowledge, cultural 
goods and …… too. One of the disadvantage of globalization is t hat people and the 
…… suffer due to the intense exchange of goods. At the same tim e, globalization 
helps to create job opportunities to people from …… countries w hen a company 


=== PAGE 167 ===

 English: Grade 11 160
moves there. Another disadvantage is, the …… , one of the two e cological problems. 
Globalisation itself is neither good nor bad. It depends on how  people deal with new 
…… in the future.
C. How has globalization impacted the climate change in Nepal? Have a 
discussion with your friends.
Speaking
Expressing obligations 
A. Look at the pictures below to see what the speakers are sayi ng. 
Okay, but you must 
always wear a helmet. 
And… you have to 
follow the traffic rules.
You should visit your 
grandparents. And 
what's more, you have to 
revisit the lessons.
I'm riding a new 
motorcycle. 
Hurrah! I've got a 
vacation for  two week. 
B. Now study these expressions. What function do they serve?
a. I have to wear glasses for reading.
b. Do you have to wear a uniform at your school?
c. You must do more exercise.
d. We ought to obey our parents.

=== PAGE 168 ===

English: Grade 11 161
e. I'll have to pay my bills next week.
f. It is necessary that you follow this guideline.
g. You are supposed to finish the work by tomorrow.
C. What would you say in the following situations?
a. You are a pillion rider on your friend’s bike and s/he is dr iving very fast.
b. You go to visit your friend and find he/she is suffering fro m fever.
c. You are in a taxi. You see that the driver is not wearing th e seatbelt.
d. One of your friends is always careless and blames others for  his/her failure. 
Project Work
You might have heard about the Non-Resident Nepali Association (NRNA). Collect 
some information about it. How far has it been able to meet its expectations? Discussing 
with your friends, write a newspaper article on 'The role of NRNA in Nation Building'. 

=== PAGE 169 ===

 English: Grade 11 162
Unit 18 Immigration and Identity
“We are all immigrants. Some people have forgotten that.” - Moises Rodrigues
Reading
Identity Crisis in Immigrants
 Before you read 
a. Who are immigrants? Do you think that people living in forei gn countries have 
no identity?
b. Complete the bubbles with the terms related to identity.
IDENTITY
Ethnicity
Now read the following book review of the novel Half A Life.
HALF A LIFE 
V .S. Naipaul
Knopf, 2001, 211 pp.
V .S. Naipaul marks his rise to Nobel laureate, however accidentally, 
with a strange new novel that is at once of a piece with and apart from 
most of his previous work. On the one hand it is a continuation  of 
his preoccupation with the innumerable questions raised by cultural 
and racial identity; on the other hand its spare, melancholy, elusive, 
somewhat heavily ironic tone contrasts with the more animated 
quality of his best fiction (A House for Mr. Biswas, for exampl e), 
and the graphic sex with which its final sections are filled is a stark 
departure from his almost priggish treatment of the subject previously.
The heart of the novel can be found in a brief scene three-quarter of the way through. At 
a rough restaurant on the coast of the African nation where he is living, Willie Chandran 


=== PAGE 170 ===

English: Grade 11 163
encounters a "big light-eyed man" man who is being abused by his Portuguese boss as 
he goes about his work as a tiler. Afterward Willie's lover, Ana, herself part Portuguese 
and part African, tells him that the tiler is illegitimate, wit h an African mother and an 
important Portuguese landowner for a father. "The rich Portuguese put their illegitimate 
mulatto children to learning certain trades," she tells him: "E lectrician, mechanic, 
metal-worker, carpenter, tiler," to which Willie responds: "I said nothing more to Ana. 
But whenever I remembered the big sweating man with the abused light eyes, carrying 
the shame of his birth on his face like a brand, I would think,  'Who will rescue that 
man? Who will avenge him?' "
It is a question of the utmost urgency to Willie, and the centr al motif of Half a Life, 
Naipaul's 13th novel. It is about a man -- the phrase is used to describe someone else, 
but it clearly is meant to describe Willie as well -- "who appe ared to have no proper 
place in the world." He is spending this, what we are to take t o be the first half of his 
life, trying to find such a place, "just letting the days go by ," trusting "that one day 
something would happen, an illumination would come to him, and he would be taken 
by a set of events to the place he should go."
Willie was born in India 40-some years ago. His father was a "man of high caste, high 
in the maharaja's revenue service," who heard the call of Mahatma Gandhi in the early 
1930s and decided to make a sacrifice of himself, a "lasting kind of sacrifice, something 
the mahatma would have approved of." Rather than marry in his o wn caste he would 
choose "the lowest person I could find." He settled upon a fellow college student, who 
was "small and coarse featured, almost tribal in appearance, noticeably black, with two 
big top teeth that showed very white," clearly a woman of "a backward caste."
This man of sacrifice is noticed by the eminent British writer Somerset Maugham, 
who comes to India (in a cameo role) to research a book. Eventu ally he emerges in 
Maugham's portrait as someone of great spirituality and self-sacrifice, a role he knows 
is far from accurate but into which he finds himself slipping e asily and comfortably. 
But those of whom the greatest sacrifice is exacted are the two children of this strange 
and unhappy relationship, Willie and his sister. Bitterly unhap py in India, loving his 
mother and despising his father, Willie manages to get a schola rship to a second-rate 
college in London and flees there.
In college and in London itself, Willie "thought he was swimming in ignorance, had lived 
without a knowledge of time." Yet in and out of school, his education proceeds apace. 
Thousands of miles from home, he begins to sense the condescension and indifference 

=== PAGE 171 ===

 English: Grade 11 164
with which the British had treated his father, and disdain grad ually metamorphoses 
into empathy. He also begins to understand that "the old rules [of India] no longer 
bound him," that "freedom . . . was his for the asking." It is a revelation: "No one he 
met, in the college or outside it, knew the rules of Willie's own place, and Willie began 
to understand that he was free to present himself as he wished.  He could, as it were, 
write his own revolution. The possibilities were dizzying. He c ould, within reason, 
remake himself and his past and his ancestry."
This is exactly what he does. He fabricates a past for himself that denies his divided 
identity and presents himself as whole. For a while he particip ates in "the special, 
passing bohemian-immigrant life of London of the late 1950s," t hough eventually he 
realizes that "the lost, the unbalanced, the alcoholic, the truly bohemian -- those parties 
in shabby Notting Hill flats no longer seemed metropolitan and dazzling." By this 
point he has created a minor career for himself as part-time au thor of scripts for the 
BBC, which gives him courage to try his hand at writing stories . He takes scenes and 
plots from movies with Jimmy Cagney and Humphrey Bogart and rew orks them to 
his own purposes, finding that "it was easier, with these borro wed stories far outside 
his own experience, and with these characters far outside himse lf, to be truer to his 
feelings than it had been with his cautious, half-hidden parables at school."
For a time it works: "Whenever Willie felt he was running out of material, running out 
of cinematic moments, he went to see old movies or foreign movies." It doesn't last. In 
time -- inevitably -- his writing "began to lead him to difficult things, things he couldn't 
face, and he stopped." He cobbles together a little book of stories that is published and 
almost universally neglected, save by a young woman of mixed Af rican background 
who tells him in a letter that "in your stories for the first t ime I find moments that are 
like moments in my own life." This is Ana. They meet, though he is apprehensive: "But 
as soon as he saw her all his anxieties fell away, and he was c onquered. She behaved 
as though she had always known him, and had always liked him. S he was young and 
small and thin, and quite pretty. She had a wonderfully easy ma nner. And what was 
most intoxicating for Willie was that for the first time in his  life he felt himself in the 
presence of someone who accepted him completely. At home his life had been ruled by 
his mixed inheritance. [But with Ana] there was, so to speak, nothing to push against, 
no misgiving to overcome, no feeling of distance."
So when she decides to go back home to her Portuguese African country, he accompanies 
her. In "that regulated colonial world" in which "to be even a second-rank Portuguese 
was to have a kind of high status," he finds "a complete acceptance." Though this does 

=== PAGE 172 ===

English: Grade 11 165
not change, he "began to understand -- and was helped in this u nderstanding by my 
own background -- that the world I had entered was only a half- and-half world, that 
many of the people who were our friends considered themselves, deep down, people 
of the second rank." Wherever he turns, he finds people whose place in the world is no 
more certain or secure than his own, though at the end of his African sojourn he is still 
so caught up in his own fears, resentments and anxieties that he fails to grasp that this 
is, in truth, a universal condition.
It is for Naipaul, not Willie Chandran, to make this central po int. He does so with 
subtlety and nuance. The novel is told by an omniscient narrator -- perhaps to distance 
Naipaul and his own experience from Willie and his story -- but  the point of view is 
self-evidently Willie's. He is a man of intelligence and character who is blind to the full 
truth about himself, at once worldly and self-deceiving. It is a state of mind that is, or 
should be, familiar to all too many of us. 
Jonathan Yardley
The Washington Post
 Ways with words 
A. Find the words from the text to solve the crossword puzzle b elow. The 
meanings of the words are given in the clues.
Across
2. as is certain to happen
4. famous and respected
6. a temporary stay
7. knowing everything
Down
1. the state of being preoccupied
3. anxious or fearful that something 
bad will happen
5. a person of mixed white and black 
ancestry
B. Find the meanings of the following words in a dictionary as they are 
used in the text. 
melancholy, elusive, motif, disdain, fabricate, intoxicate, resentment

=== PAGE 173 ===

 English: Grade 11 166
C. Do the bold words in the following sentences have the same 
pronunciation but different meanings?
Dear Board of Education,
I am also board of education!
Homophones are words with the same pronunciation but having dif ferent meanings 
and spellings. For example, board and bored, meet and meat are homophonous.
D. Choose the right word to fill in the blanks.
a. Can you …… the box in the back garden? (bury/berry)
b. Alex could not …… the branch off the tree. (break/brake)
c. …… pencil is on the floor? (Who's/Whose)
d. We have got very …… (phew/few) tasks left.
e. Some tribes worship their gods before they …… (prey/pray)
f. …… it. Everything is messed up.(Dam /Damn)
g. What a wonderful …… the professor presented. (lesson/lessen)
 Comprehension 
Answer these questions.
a. How is Willie Chandran different from the rest of his family ?
b. Who is the main character of Half A Life? How is he describe d? 
c. Why does Willie leave India?
d. What is the revelation that Willie begin to feel in college and in London? 
e. Why does Willie accompany Ana?
f. What is the central issue Naipal has raised in the novel?
 Critical thinking 
a. What kind of divided identity is depicted int he novel Half A Life?  How do 
characters in the novel try to create new identities for themselves? Explain.
b. Discuss the similaries between the author and the protagonis t in the noivel?

=== PAGE 174 ===

English: Grade 11 167
Writing
A. Study the general format of a book review and film review.
A book review is a scholarly review in which a book is analyzed in terms of its content, 
style, and merit. Similarly, a film review is a review that provides a short description of 
a film including the reviewer’s opinion about it. A scholarly review should use formal 
language. The format of a book and film review is presented below.
Book review Film review
 Introduction (title, author, 
place of publication: 
publisher, date of 
publication, number of 
pages, type of book-fiction, 
nonfiction etc)
 Author's background (who 
the author is and where s/he 
stands in the genre or field 
of inquiry adding his/her 
contribution in literature)
 Summary and plot
 Theme and writing style 
 Writer's impression and 
evaluation of it/critique's 
opinion
 Introduction (with title, release date, background 
information, genre, starring)
 Summary of the story
 Analysis of the plot elements (rising action/
climax)
 Creative elements (dialogues, characters, use 
of colors, camera techniques, mood, tone, 
symbols, costumes or anything that contributes 
or takes away from the overall plot)
 Opinion (supported with examples and facts 
from the story)
 Critique's opinion/Conclusion (announcing 
whether the filmmaker was successful in his/
her purpose, re-statement of the evidence, 
explanation of how the motion picture was 
helpful for providing a deeper understand of 
course
B. Write a review of a book/film you have recently read or watc hed.

=== PAGE 175 ===

 English: Grade 11 168
Grammar
Reported speech (statements)
A. Look at the pictures and read the expressions.
B. Study the following.
Direct speech Indirect speech
'I love the Toy Story films,' she said. She said she loved the T oy Story films.
'I worked as a waiter before becoming a 
chef,' he said.
He said he'd worked as a waiter before 
becoming a chef.
'I'll phone you tomorrow,' he said. He said he'd phone me the ne xt day.
She asked, "What do you want?" She asked (me) what I wanted.
He said to me, "Do you live near here?" He asked me if/whether I  lived near there.
"Don't be late," I said to Joe. I told Joe not to be late.
She said, "Don't the children like 
ice-cream?"
She was surprised that the children didn't 
like ice-cream.
In indirect speech, we often use a tense which is 'further back' in the past (e.g. worked) 
than the tense originally used (e.g. work). This is called 'backshift'. We may also need 
to change other words that were used, for example pronouns. 
Change the following into indirect speech.
a. She said, "While I was having dinner, the phone rang."
b. My friend said, "Where are they staying?"
c. Jamila said, "I travel a lot in my job."
He said that we 
have to attend the 
meeting tomorrow. What did the 
principal say?  Okay, sir.
You have to 
attend the meeting 
tomorrow. 


=== PAGE 176 ===

English: Grade 11 169
d. She said to me, "We lived in China for five years."
e. He said to me, "Do you like ice-cream?"
f. They said, "Hurray! We've won the match."
g. He said, "I'd tried everything without success, but this new  medicine is great."
h. Sony said, "I go to the gym next to your house."
i. He said, "Be quiet after 10 o'clock."
j. He said, "I don't want to go to the party unless he invites me."
k. He said to me, "I will see you tomorrow if you meet me."
l. She said, "If I were you, I would give up the work."
Listening
A. Look at the picture and guess answers 
to these questions.
a. What do you see in the picture?
b. Do you watch movies? Why?
c. What types of movies do you like to 
watch?
C. Listen to a film review and choose the best answer.
a. The speaker finds the movie 'Fun in the City' really …… 
i. awesome ii. terrible iii. awful
b. Through this critique, the speaker …… 
i. wants to save our money being wasted
ii. urges us to watch the movie
iii. recommends a new taste movie
c. Amidst the film, characters go to ……  which is completely un justifiable.
i. Japan ii. India iii. New York 
d. The characters in the film …… 
i. have fun, travel and explore
ii. gossip, cry and shop
iii. have a row, quarrel and fight


=== PAGE 177 ===

 English: Grade 11 170
e. The speaker suggests us to go and watch the movie, …… instea d.
i. Twilight Mirror ii. Twilight Saga iii. Twilight More
f. How long have the audiences been waiting for the movie?
i. 5 years ii. A decade iii. A score of years
g. The speaker most admires about the film is …… 
i. the place ii. the music iii. the story 
h. The speaker is emotionally attached with …… 
i. the characters
ii. the story and characters
iii. their cultural representation
C. List out the words the speaker used which people use to talk  about the 
films.
Speaking
Reporting
A. Yesterday you met your friend. You hadn't seen him/her for a  long 
time. Here are some of the things he/she said to you. Work in p airs. 
Take turns to report to your partner what he/she said to you.
a. I like this song. f. Don't play on the grass, boys.
b. Where is your sister? g. Where have you spent your money?
c. I don't speak Italian. h. I never make mistakes.
d. Say hello to Jim. i. Does she know Robert?
e. The film began at seven o'clock. j. Don't try this at home.
B. Work in pairs. Ask your partner these questions and take not es. After 
you have finished this, find a new partner and report what you have 
learnt about your first partner.
a. What is your favourite sport?
b. What are your plans for your next vacation?
c. Who is your best friend? How long have you known him/her?

=== PAGE 178 ===

English: Grade 11 171
d. What kind of music do you like?
e. What did you do yesterday evening?
f. How do you want to improve English?
g. What do you want to be in the future?
C. Report the following using the verbs from the list. The subj ect of the 
reporting clause has been given at the end.
admit explain assure deny point out
insist accuse  claim  warn
a. There will be no delay. (He)
b. Don't mention it again. (She)
c. I've taken the money. (My brother)
d. You took my money. (Neha)
e. You should have the dinner with me. (She)
f. No, I haven't stolen anyone's bag. (He)
g. I have closed the door. I can remember it. (She)
h. The doctor is out to lunch. (The receptionist)
i. This van has been in the car park all day. (The guard)
Project Work
Meet a person who is living far away from the family for a long  time. Ask questions 
about her/his feelings about homesickness. Then, write a report  and present it in the 
class.

=== PAGE 179 ===

 English: Grade 11 172
Unit 19 Travel and Tourism
“Two roads diverged in a wood and I – I took the one less travelled by.” - Robert Frost
Reading
Discovering West Nepal - The Wild Frontier
 Before you read 
Discuss these questions with your partner.
a. Have you ever visited western Nepal? 
Describe your experience.
b. Do you like travelling? Why do people 
travel?
c. Do you know the name of this temple? 
Where is it located?
Now read the following travelogue by the Philippine freelance w riter, Megan 
Leung about her five-week adventurous experiences of visiting western Nepal.
What do you do when you get lost along your travels?
Along my five-week walk in the western Himalayas of Nepal, a colourful rooster heavy 
on pink feathers fluffed its roseate plumes at me as though to say, ‘Yes, bideshi, it’s all 
real’. The flightless bird and I stared at each other for a brief moment/(momentum) and 
I could have sworn it winked at me. By this point, my sanity ha d already gone hazy, 
unlike the clear blue skies above the high passes of Dolpa.
Further along the trail, patches of pink grass and purple flora sprinkled the ground. Sun-
dried shrubs filled the crisp Himalayan air with the familiar s weetness of chamomile. 
Stone houses held themselves together under a rock, above a river, looking too crumbly 
to live in, but the inhabitants didn’t seem to mind. I wondered how much more oddity 
hides and flourishes in West Nepal. I wasn’t supposed to be in this region. But, as 
with any good story, a happy accident would see me walking thro ugh the country’s 
unknown trails.
Having been living on the road as a traveller for four years now and visiting Nepal for 
the third time, I wanted to push the envelope and experience places where few tourists 
go. I chose the Dhaulagiri Circuit. The day I started my walk I  asked bus drivers in 
Beni to point me towards the direction of Tatopani. As it were, there are two Tatopani 


=== PAGE 180 ===

English: Grade 11 173
— one on the east along the Annapurna Circuit, one on the west along the Dhaulagiri 
Circuit. I would end up in the east and I would learn too late that I was on the other side 
of where I wanted to be. My options would be to turn back or to  swim in the pickle I 
was in. I took my map out and decided to walk up to Mukhtinath.
In a guest house in Lower Mustang I met an Englishman walking the Great Himalayan 
Trail. We exchanged stories over cups of hot raksi  to warm our cold selves and after 
looking at his map I decided to make a pilgrimage to Rara Lake.
In Darbang I stopped to resupply food and walked towards a vill age named 
Sibang, 15 kilometres further as the crow flies but we are talk ing about the largest 
mountains of this planet. It was a long day. From one lush gree n hill to another, I 
went mathi and tala, mathi and tala, through warm temperate for ests, under giant 
spider webs, over rapids, beside glassy waterholes too tempting  to swim in, if not for 
their stinging coldness.
In a scenic village named Lamsung, a young couple welcomed me in their home where 
I stayed the night. In the morning, someone offered to give me a ride on his horse (for 
a fee) but I decided to keep using my own legs.
In Bhujekhung I washed my clothes and myself by the river. The didi who hosted me 
for the night called ‘sutne’ (bedtime; literally, to sleep) at seven in the evening. There 
was no electricity but there was a hole in the ceiling and the bright stars lit the cold 
dark room up so beautifully that I didn’t mind.
The next day, a 10-hour walk to Dorpatan had me marching until past sunset. I had to 
take my shoes off to make a river crossing. I knew that the sli ppery rocks and angry 
glacial water were going to be a painful adventure. A bahini cr ossed the river and 
took my pack, made me wear her flipflops, held me by the hand, instructed me where 
exactly to place my feet, and got me across. Her girl friends w ere all cheering, I said 
my tourist classic Namaste, hugged them all, and moved on.
When finally, I found a base for the night, I was soon joined by local politicians from 
Kathmandu who were on an official trip. The evening stretched as we all danced in the 
dining room, Nepali music on full blast.
A village named Thankur had only two houses. On the way there, I had a mild heart 
attack as three large birds suddenly took flight from a tree next to the footpath. It was 
an arid region with not much life visible in the periphery but these birds were large, 
shiny, and rainbow-coloured. They were the national bird of Nep al, the Himalayan 

=== PAGE 181 ===

 English: Grade 11 174
monal. That wasn’t the last surprise for the day — the stars in  Thankur that evening 
were blinding, the most brilliant I have ever seen this side of the globe.
In Pelma, I met a Welshman who has been to Nepal nine times. I met him again in 
Dule and we walked towards the Jang La pass and to Dunai. The distance between the 
two villages was so long that we decided to camp halfway through the trail. I squeezed 
into the Welshman’s tiny summer tent and attempted to sleep on 4,500-metre altitude. 
We laughed at the fact that no one else was insane enough to be on that mountain on a 
cold November night.
Further west into remoter regions, school children led me to a village that sounded like 
‘Orta’, just after Sarmi. The village is built on brown rocks, houses stacked together 
with open, free-fall decks. A family fed 
me, sheltered me, and walked with me 
the day after to show me a shortcut — a 
snowy pass towards Jumla. I walked for 
five hours in the snow and a further three 
hours in cold winds, through ancient alpine 
forests and exposed mountain ridges.
By the time I reached Jumla, I was ill with 
an unknown virus and a bad tummy. An 
American I met at a hotel gave me medicine. The 
pani puri at a local eatery also helped 
in my recovery.
Once I felt well enough to carry on, I started walking towards Rara, through Khali 
Lagna and then Bulbule. In Khali Lagna I was welcomed by a didi who was picking 
the brains out of a sheep skull. She said if I wanted to wash myself there is a bucket of 
water in the outhouse. I checked it out and the water surface on the bucket was frozen. 
Cracking it felt strangely satisfying and the pani underneath was surprisingly lukewarm.
“One more day,” I whispered to myself. I was excited for the la st push, thinking it 
would be an easy final walk. Of course it wasn’t.
To get to Rara Lake I decided to take a shortcut and cross anot her pass. On the map, 
the trail to this pass was barely visible. The suggested route is a 25-kilometre walk. My 
chosen route was less than half of that. Oh boy.
I walked through foot-deep snow for hours, my shoes and feet became wet but the sky 
was blue and the sun was bright and the views were otherworldly , giving me enough 
Jang La pass

=== PAGE 182 ===

English: Grade 11 175
to be cheerful about. Once I had 
reached the pass I was in for a 
shock: the skinny cliff path was 
snowed-in. There was a steep drop 
of 300 metres and I was on top of a 
4,000-metre mountain. There was 
nothing to hold on to but loose 
metamorphic rocks; grabbing the 
wrong one could be fatal. But 
turning back meant walking more 
hours, and in the dark.
Without tent and food, that option 
was only slightly more dangerous than crossing an icy cliff edg e without ice axe and 
crampons.
I dug my heels and hands in the snow, one frozen movement at a time, until I was on 
the other side. It was cold but my adrenaline ran so high that I was sweating from the 
suspense. Imagine my relief once I’ve made it across all four cliff crossings!
And so I arrived at Rara Lake alive and well. The biggest fresh water lake in Nepal. 
Himalaya was there, glistening in its dark blue glory, waiting for my arrival. The 
magnificent sky-scraping pine trees decorated the ground with giant pine cones. Coots 
glided over the crystal clear water, occasionally diving under to disappear and resurface 
again. White peaks said hello from a distance. There were only two hotels in the national 
park, at least on the lake side. It’s strange to think that Fewa Lake in Pokhara was once 
this quiet.
Through a five-week long walk, I have covered a distance that totals up to 25 percent 
of the Nepal Himalaya via the lower Great Himalayan Trail, alon g with some funky 
detours. If I ever thought I knew Nepal and its cultures, the west shook that knowing.
By and large, I would describe what I witnessed and experienced as medieval and raw. 
The wild western region is a step or two back in time, when we knew how to survive 
with our primal instincts, human intuition, and oneness with nature.
Megan Leung
Rara Tal from a snowed-in pass

=== PAGE 183 ===

 English: Grade 11 176
 Ways with words 
A.  Find the words from the text which mean the following.
a. became fuller and softer by shaking
b. sound mental health
c. consisting of or easily breaking into small pieces
d. neither very hot nor very cold
e. land that does not have enough water to support the growth o f plants
f. only slightly warm
B. Find the meanings of the following words in an English dicti onary, 
write their word classes and use them in your own sentences. 
hazy   frontier   lush    flipflops  altitude fatal magnificent
C. Make a list of the Nepali words used in the text and write t heir English 
equivalents. For example: didi (Nepali) – elder sister (English).
D. Practise saying these words with consonant clusters /sk/, /s p/ and /st/ 
aloud with your friends.
skin  scare spot  speak star stone
school  scarf  speed  space  stupid step
skill skull sport  spend  steal  stand
scale  skip  spark  special  stock  stain
skirt  ski  speech  spoon  staff  study
 Comprehension 
Answer these questions.
a. How did the author feel when she saw a colourful rooster in the western 
Himalayas?
b. How does she describe the houses on the trails of western Ne pal?
c. What does she mean when she says "I walked towards a village 15 
kilometres further as the crow flies?"
d. Describe the village Thankur in brief.
e. What happened when she reached Jumla and how was she relieve d?
f. How does the author describe the bucket water in Khali Lagna ?
g. How was Rara Lake on the day she reached there?

=== PAGE 184 ===

English: Grade 11 177
 Critical thinking 
a. It is said that travelling a place equals to reading three b ooks. Do you agree?  
Why?
b. The author spent five-week long walk along the western Himal ayas. Do you 
think it was adventurous? Why?
Writing
A. Write a travelogue of your recent visit to a natural/religio us place in 
about 300 words. Use the following clues.
Local costumes and traditions ....  Cuisine …Depiction of place s of interest, local 
history and culture .... Your adventures ..... Prices and transportation … Entertainment
B. Write an essay in about 500 words on 'Importance of Tourism in 
Nepal'.
Grammar
A. Study the following table.
Active sentences Passive sentences
They destroyed the building. The building was destroyed.
Are they meeting him at the station? Is he being met at the stat ion?
She handed me the plate. I was handed the plate.
The plate was handed to me.
I enjoyed taking the children to the park. The children enjoyed being taken to the 
park.
They agreed to postpone the meeting. It was agreed to postpone t he meeting.
I don't like people laughing at me. I don't like being laughed a t.
She likes people taking her photograph. She likes having her pho tograph taken.
Who built the Taj Mahal? Who was the Taj Mahal built by?
We use the passive voice to change the focus of the sentence.
My bike was stolen. (passive – focus on my bike)
Someone stole my bike. (active – focus on someone)

=== PAGE 185 ===

 English: Grade 11 178
B. Complete these sentences using the verbs given in the bracke ts.
a. Letters …… by the postman every day. (deliver)
b. This bag …… in the bus yesterday. (find)
c. The gate …… at 7:00 pm every evening. (lock)
d. I …… to the party last week. (invite)
e. The telephone …… by Graham Bell. (invent)
f. Muna Madan …… by Devkota. (write)
g. How much money …… in the robbery? (steal)
h. Do you know cheese …… from milk? (make)
i. I was born in Kathmandu, but …… in Dhangadhi. (grow)
C. Change the following sentences into passive.
a. I didn’t fix the problem.
b. Police protect the town.
c, John’s mother raised him in a small town.
d. Someone painted the building last year.
e, Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928.
f. Some students study grammar on the Internet.
g. Someone had broken the window by 3:00 p.m.
h. A strange man was watching us.
i. Tokyo will hold the Olympics in 2020.
j. We are working on the report right now.
k. My manager has told him to arrive earlier.
l. They could not have made the mistake.
m. I hope they are going to hire me soon.
n. I don't like people staring at me.
o. She likes people waving at her.
p. Who told you the story?
q. Is he repairing the bicycle?

=== PAGE 186 ===

English: Grade 11 179
Listening
A. Look at the picture and guess answers to these questions.
a. Have you ever been to the place as shown in the picture?
b. What should we do if we happen to go there?
B. Listen to the audio and answer these questions.
a. What are the agents of carving sandstone layers?
b. How can these arches be reached?
c. Why should one leave words wherever s/he goes?
d. What preparation should the visitor do in case s/he gets inj ured?
e. How can one find the right destination?
C. Listen to the audio and write 'True' or 'False' against the statements.
a. Thousands of arches are found in the Arches National Park. 
b. Visitors can go there only during specified time of the year . 
c. The writer generally goes hiking with his kith and kins.
d. Water resources are available in abundance around the nation al park. 
e. You are forbidden to take photos there.
D. Suppose you are the in-charge of a national park. Make a list of 'Dos' 
and 'Don’ts' for the visitors.

=== PAGE 187 ===

 English: Grade 11 180
Speaking
Expressing compliments
A. Look at these descriptions.
 
B. Now look at some ways of expressing compliments and respondi ng to 
them.
Expressing complements Responding to complements 
- You’re looking good.
- What a nice shirt!
- How beautiful you look today!
- I like your new hairdo.
- What a nice garden!
- You have a beautiful home!
- What a cute baby!
- You have a beautiful hair.
- Thank you. 
- Do you think so?
- Thank you for the compliment.
- It's nice of you to say so. 
- Oh, thanks. 
- How kind of you to say so. 
- I'm glad you think so.
- Don't flatter me.
C. Work in pairs. Your friend complements you in the following situations 
and you respond to them. 
a. You are at a party. A friend performed a classical dance ver y well.
b. You compliment your friend on his/her appearance.
c. Your mother has cooked tasty food.
d. Your friend served you banana custard at lunch time at his h ome.
e. You are having dinner at your friend’s home.
f. You want to tell your friend you like his/her new shoes.
g. Your friend has given you a birthday gift. 
Project Work
Visit one of the interesting cultural/historical site in your s urrounding and collect 
detailed information about the place. And, prepare an artistic brochure of the place.
You’re looking 
really smart.
I really like 
your hairdo.


=== PAGE 188 ===

English: Grade 11 181
Unit 20 Science and Technology
“One machine can do the work of fifty ordinary men. No machine can do the work of 
one extraordinary man.” –Elbert Hubbard
Reading
Taking my Son to College, Where Technology has Replaced 
Serendipity
 Before you read 
Discuss the following questions with your partner.
a. What modern gadgets do you have? 
b. Do they make your school life easier and better? How?
c. In what ways does the use of technology affect our education  system?
d. Look at these two pictures. Is there anything interesting? D iscuss.
Now read the following essay about Kline’s reflection of her college experience, in 
comparison to her son’s college experience.
My son Hayden started college last week. Like many parents of freshmen, my husband 
and I drove him to school together, the back of the car filled with essentials like extra-
long twin sheets, a clip-on light for his bunk bed and a random mix of extension cords.
The milk crates, shower caddy and three-ring binders we helped him carry up the stairs 
flashed me back to my own first days of college - but they weren’t the only reason this 
experience felt so familiar.
Three decades ago, I was a freshman at the same university. Unlike Hayden, who grew 
up outside of New York and attended a competitive suburban high  school, I was the 

=== PAGE 189 ===

 English: Grade 11 182
only student from my small town in Maine to go to Yale, one of the few to even venture 
out of state. And I had no idea what I was getting into.
I was lucky, in a way, to be so naive; I didn’t know what I did n’t know. I floated 
through my first year obliviously unaware of the social currenc ies being exchanged 
around me, only dimly perceiving markers of wealth and status.
When a fellow student bragged about his Alfa Romeo, I thought he meant a Camaro, the 
fanciest car I’d ever seen. When a classmate casually mentioned that she was meeting 
her parents in Gstaad for the long weekend, I assumed it was a town in Connecticut. 
Imagine my surprise when I realized that actual Vanderbilts lived in Vanderbilt Hall.
But it wasn’t just my relative lack of sophistication that made my experience so vastly 
different from my son’s. Typewriters and carbon paper, telephon es with curly cords, 
TVs with a few channels and no remotes, cassette tapes; compare d with the tools 
Hayden has at his disposal, I went to college in the Stone Age.
Without even thinking about it, my son uses technology in almost everything he does, 
large and small. He installed Yale-specific apps on his phone that provide information 
about when the washers and dryers in the basement of his dorm are available, the daily 
menus of each dining hall, ratings of local restaurants, student contact information, the 
entire list of classes, and an interactive campus map that shows you where you are and 
where you’re going.
Within minutes of learning his three suitemates’ names this sum mer, he knew an 
incredible amount about them: They friended and followed each o ther on Facebook 
and Twitter and Instagram and immediately had access to each other’s prom pictures, 
family vacation shots, performance videos, philosophical musing s. They established 
an ongoing group text, exchanging information such as who was bringing an Xbox and 
who had a coffeemaker. Soon after arriving on campus, Hayden made a spreadsheet of 
potential classes, vetting them in advance by using teacher rat ing sites and watching 
videos of potential professors on YouTube.
There’s no question that my son is better prepared for college than I was. He manages 
his time better, is more efficient and more directed, and spend s less time in lines and 
more time doing exactly what he sets out to do.
But I wonder what may be lost. I suspect it’s unlikely that he will ever, as I did, trek 
all the way across campus on a snowy day to a friend’s dorm roo m, only to find that 
person gone but another roommate available, and making a new friend in the process. 

=== PAGE 190 ===

English: Grade 11 183
He won’t have to type and retype his papers 
— using Write-Out, no less! — to make 
revisions, finding in that process new insights 
into what he’s written. I doubt that he’ll make 
his way to a common room at 9 p.m. every 
Sunday to watch a specific TV show ( L.A. 
Law, I’m thinking of you), bonding with a 
hearty group of loyalists.
I think fondly of the rabbit holes I disappeared 
down when I researched papers for history 
and English because I couldn’t find quite 
what I was looking for, or because I had to 
go through so much material to find examples for my thesis. Whe n you can type a 
few words into a search engine and land on your topic — or when  you can scan a 
Shakespeare play for specific words or symbols — what opportunities might you miss 
to expand your thinking in unexpected ways?
I worry that students today are more connected and more fragmen ted, learning more 
about one another from afar but watching programmes on their iP ads in their rooms. 
The knowledge they have at their fingertips may make them more productive, but it 
may also blunt the thrill of unanticipated discovery.
Sometime in my first week on that long-ago campus, I found myse lf hopelessly lost, 
scrutinizing an indecipherable map, when a freshman boy came up  to me. “Can I 
help you with that?”  He asked, and though he didn’t know his way around any better 
than I did, we figured it out together. Twenty-three years of marriage later, we’re still 
figuring it out.
As Hayden navigates his own journey, I wish for him the satisfa ction of productivity 
and the joy of tapping his potential. But I also hope for him at least some of the wide-
eyed wonder I felt as a freshman, the delight of discovering a world that was as remote 
and unknown to me as a foreign country.
And I hope he’ll experience the unexpected pleasures of getting  lost, of chance 
encounters, and the incalculable benefits of time wasted for no good reason at all.
Christina Baker Kline
Technological tree

=== PAGE 191 ===

 English: Grade 11 184
 Ways with words 
A. Match the words with their correct definitions.
a. freshman i. say something in a boastful manner
b. naive ii. action of throwing away something
c. obliviously iii. not able to be calculated or estimated
d. brag iv. a first-year student at a university, college, or h igh school
e. disposal v. having a lack of experience or knowledge 
f. dorm vi. someone who shares your bathroom/living room/kitche n in 
college
g. suitemate vii. dormitory, student residence hall or building  
h. incalculable viii. without conscious awareness
B. Replace the bold words in (a–h) selecting synonyms from the box.
delight     incredible     potential    unanticipated    fragmented  scrutinizing      
navigate     indecipherable 
a. Her story is unbelievable in the literal sense of the word.
b. We often read the novels of the reputed writers in the world.
c. The Facebook users are scattered but connected to each other through the 
Internet.
d. Sometimes unexpected events happen in our life.
e. He paused, examining the faces of Anjana and Manju with his glittering 
eyes.
f. I am sorry to say your handwriting is unreadable.
g. He is matured. He can direct his own journey to make his career better.
h. Gita's heart swelled with pleasure, translating her confidence into power.
C. Complete the sentences by choosing the correct word given in  brackets.
a. Does television …… children? (affect/effect)
b. Does television have an …… on children? (affect/effect)
c. Could you …… me your book, please? (borrow/lend)
d. Can I …… your pen? (borrow/lend)
e. Prices seem to …… every year. (raise/rise)
f. You can …… your hand if you want to ask a question. (raise/rise)
g. What did he …… to you? (say/tell)

=== PAGE 192 ===

English: Grade 11 185
h. I can't …… Hindi. (speak/talk)
i. I will …… to you on the phone. (speak/talk)
j. I think that's a very …… idea. (sensible/sensitive)
k. My teeth are very …… to cold. (sensible/sensitive)
l. Our …… is a popular person. (principal/principle)
m. I couldn't understand the …… of gravity. (principal/principle)
n. All friends, …… Nabina, came to the party. (accept/except)
o. Will you …… my request? (accept/except)
p. They were making too much …… . (noise/sound) 
q. All she could hear was the …… of the waves. (noise/sound)
r. Did you give him any…… for his career? (advice/advise)
s. My parents …… me to be a teacher. (advice/advise)
 Comprehension 
Answer these questions.
a. Why did the author feel that she was lucky to be so naïve of her freshman 
year at college?
b. Why did she say that she went to college in the Stone Age?
c. What kinds of technological tools can Hayden use at his coll ege life unlike 
at his mother’s time?
d. How has the internet and social sites affected the lifestyle  of the youths?
e. What things about college life will Hayden really miss unlik e his mother?
f. The writer says, "I worry that students today are more conne cted and more 
fragmented". Isn't this paradoxical? How?
 Critical thinking 
a. Do you think that advancements of technology can hinder the exposure students 
receive in school, and block them from gaining some of life’s most memorable 
moments?  Give reasons in support of your answer.
b. Kline’s essay focuses on the contrast between her son’s freshman college experience 
and her own, but she also establishes what they have in common. Explain.
c. Has internet aided to broadening or narrowing the critical t hinking capacity of 
youths or readers? How?

=== PAGE 193 ===

 English: Grade 11 186
Writing
Interpreting graphs and charts.
A. Read the model interpretation of a line graph. Focus your at tention on 
bolded words.
The line graph compares  the fast food consumption of teenagers in Australia 
between 1975 and 2000, a period of 25 years.  Overall, the consumption of fish and 
chips declined over the period, whereas the amount of pizza and hamburgers that were 
eaten increased.
In 1975, the most popular fast food with Australian teenagers was fish and chips, being 
eaten 100 times a year. This was far higher than Pizza and hamburgers, which were 
consumed approximately 5 times a year. However, apart from a br ief rise again from 
1980 to 1985, the consumption of fish and chips gradually declined over the 25-year 
timescale to finish at just under 40.
In sharp contrast to this, teenagers ate the other two fast foods at much higher levels. 
Pizza consumption increased gradually until it overtook the consumption of fish and 
chips in 1990. It then levelled off from 1995 to 2000. The biggest rise was  seen in 
hamburgers as the occasions they were eaten increased sharply throughout the 1970’s 
and 1980’s, exceeding that of fish and chips in 1985. It finished at the same level that 
fish and chips began, with consumption at 100 times a year.
(Source:https://www.ieltsbuddy.com/ielts-academic-writing-task-1.html)

=== PAGE 194 ===

English: Grade 11 187
B. Interpret the information given in the following chart.
C. What gadgets do your friends in the class have? Ask them. Co llect 
data and present it in the pie chart. 
Grammar
A. Fill in the gaps with suitable articles where necessary.
a. Is he working as …… university professor?
b. My younger sister watches …… television a lot.
c. A: What did you get for your birthday?
 B: I got …… lot of good presents.
d. I'm going to …… Dominican Republic for my winter vacation.
e. I have to go to …… bank today to deposit some money.
f. Durga was injured in the accident and was taken to …… neares t hospital.
g. Every parent should visit …… school to meet the teachers.
h. Who is …… woman in this photograph?
i. There is …… piano in the corner of the room.
j. A: Do you think he is lying?
 B: No, he's the kind of …… guy that always tells the truth. 

=== PAGE 195 ===

 English: Grade 11 188
B. Put a/an or the in the spaces.
BOB COLLINS: A PROFILE
Bob Collins has recently become …… minister in the new governme nt, being 
appointed Minister for Industry. Mr. Collins has had a varied c areer. He was …… 
professional footballer in the 1960s, some people considering h im to be …… most 
skillful player of his generation. After a serious injury, he b ecame …… manager of 
…… oldest pub in Edinburgh. Five years later, he was offered th e position of …… 
executive director of Arcon, one of …… biggest supermarket chai ns in the country. 
He became …… Member of Parliament in 1990.
Listening
A. Look at the picture and guess answers to 
these questions.
a. Who are these people?
b. Where are they?
c. Have you ever been hospitalized? Why? Share your 
experiences with your friends.
B. Now, listen to the audio and tick (
 ) the correct answer.
a. The reconstructive surgery is used when …… 
i. a child gets injured
ii. a man wants his nose changed
iii. a woman needs her stomach reshaped
b. People with severe physical deformity may …… 
i. lack educational opportunities
ii. lack job opportunities
iii. even lack self esteem
c. Reconstructive surgeries have been widely done these days wi th the aid of 
……
i. affluent people
ii. volunteer organizations
iii. INGOs


=== PAGE 196 ===

English: Grade 11 189
d. In addition to providing services to the patients, the speci alists also …… 
i. give health workers valuable in-field training
ii. get impetus for future research
iii. develop deeper understanding of the patients
e. After such activities, the patients …… 
i. can live with full dignity
ii. can live with some normalcy
iii. still fear of being severely criticized 
f. The interested and benevolent people can help by …… 
i. adopting unwanted/discarded children
ii. making financial contributions 
iii. educating themselves 
C. You can find many people with severe physical deformity beca use of 
illness or other reasons. How are your feelings towards them? H ow 
have they been treated? Discuss. 
Speaking
Requesting 
A. Study how people make requests.
Could you 
please help me 
lift this load?
Excuse me, would 
you mind taking 
our picture?Of course.
I'm afraid not.


=== PAGE 197 ===

 English: Grade 11 190
B. Look at some of the ways of making requests and their respon ses.
Making request Accepting Denying 
Can you open the door please?
Could you turn on the radio, please?
Could you possibly hold my drink?
Would you mind closing the door, please?
I wonder if you could lend me Rs. 500.
Would it be possible to lend me your bike?
I wonder if you could help me?
You wouldn’t take me to the airport, would 
you?
I would be grateful if you could send me 
your price list.
Yes, sure.
Sure.
Yes, of course.
Certainly yes.
With pleasure.
Sure, don’t worry.
Sure, no problem.
Oh sorry, I can’t.
I just can’t, 
I am sorry.
I am afraid, I can’t.
No, certainly not.
C. Work in pairs. Make requests and respond using the following  
prompts. Use different structures.
Example: Ritu: Would you mind opening the window, please?
 Bina: Sure. That’s no problem at all.
a. turn down the radio b. do homework
c. stop smoking d. pass the salt
e. help to cook food f. do the washing up
g. switch the light on
Offering
A. Study how people make offers. Shall I help 
you washing 
the clothes?
Would you like 
to have a seat?


=== PAGE 198 ===

English: Grade 11 191
B. Look at the following table and see how requests are made an d how 
they can be accepted or denied.
Offering Accepting offers Rejecting offers
Can I help you?
Shall I bring you a cake?
Would you like some coffee?
I’ll do the cleaning, if you 
like.
How about eating some 
pizza?
Do you want me to switch 
on the TV for you?
Let me help you.
I’d be happy to take you to 
the airport.
Yes, please. I'd like to.
That would be very kind of 
you.
Yes please, that would be 
lovely.
Yes please, I'd love to.
If you wouldn't mind.
If you could.
Thank you, that would be 
great
No, thanks.
It’s Ok. I can do it 
myself.
Thank you for your 
kindness but I can do it 
myself.
Don’t worry. I can do it.
I appreciate that but I 
can do it myself.
C. What would you say in each of the situations below?
a. A tourist in your town looks lost. Offer to help her.
b. You see an old lady trying to lift a heavy bag.
c. Your teacher says that it's hot in the classroom. You are cl oser to the 
window.
d. You are a guest at somebody's house. The phone is ringing, b ut your host 
is busy inthe kitchen.
e. Your friend is feeling bored.
D. Work in pairs. Make offers and accept or decline the offers, using the 
prompts below.
Example: A: Shall I carry some of your bags for you?
 B: Thanks. That’s very kind of you. /No thanks.
a. turn on the TV b. clean the room
c. polish the shoes d. get something to drink
e. drop you at the bus station f. get you some water
g. make tea
Project Work
In the presence of the English teacher, organize an oratory contest in the class on 'The 
impacts of science and technology on human life'.

=== PAGE 199 ===

 English: Grade 11 192
Part Two
Literary Studies
Short Stories
Poem
Essay
One-Act Play

=== PAGE 200 ===

English: Grade 11 193
Unit 1 Short Stories
1 The Selfish Giant
Oscar Wilde
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. Look at this picture. Is it a real man or 
mythical human? 
b. Is it good to be selfish?
c. How do selfish people behave?
Oscar Wilde  (1854-1900) was an Irish wit, poet, 
novelist, and playwright. Wilde was born of 
professional and literary parents. His father, Sir 
William Wilde, was an ear and eye surgeon, who 
also published books. His mother was a revolutionary 
poet and an authority on Celtic myth and folklore. He 
published a book of poems, lectured in the United 
States and Canada on the new "English Renaissance 
in Art" and interior decoration, and then returned to 
London where he worked prolifically as a journalist.
Known for his biting wit, Wilde became one of the best-known pe rsonalities of his 
day. He is best known for his only novel, The Picture of Dorian Gray (1891), and his 
comic masterpieces Lady Windermere’s Fan (1892) and The Importance of Being 
Earnest (1895). He was a spokesperson for the late 19th-century Aesthetic movement 
in England, which advocated art for art’s sake. 
'The Selfish Giant' is a short story for children written by Oscar Wilde. It was first 
published in the anthology The Happy Prince and Other Tales  in 1888. This story 
is about a giant who learned an important lesson about love and  sharing, and holds 
different meanings for people of different age.


=== PAGE 201 ===

 English: Grade 11 194
Reading
Every afternoon, as they were coming from school, the children used to go and play in 
the Giant’s garden.
It was a large lovely garden, with soft green grass. Here and there over the grass stood 
beautiful flowers like stars, and there were twelve peach-trees  that in the spring-time 
broke out into delicate blossoms of pink and pearl, and in the autumn bore rich fruit. 
The birds sat on the trees and sang so sweetly that the children used to stop their games 
in order to listen to them. ‘How happy we are here!’ they cried to each other.
One day the Giant came back. He had been to visit his friend the Cornish ogre, and had 
stayed with him for seven years. After the seven years were ove r he had said all that 
he had to say, for his conversation was limited, and he determined to return to his own 
castle. When he arrived he saw the children playing in the garden.
‘What are you doing here?’ he cried in a very gruff voice, and the children ran away.
‘My own garden is my own garden,’ said the Giant; ‘any one can understand that, and 
I will allow nobody to play in it but myself.’ So he built a hi gh wall all round it, and 
put up a notice-board.
TRESPASSERS 
WILL BE 
PROSECUTED
He was a very selfish Giant. The poor children had now nowhere to play. They tried to 
play on the road, but the road was very dusty and full of hard stones, and they did not 
like it. They used to wander round the high wall when their lessons were over, and talk 
about the beautiful garden inside. ‘How happy we were there,’ they said to each other.
Then the Spring came, and all over the country there were littl e blossoms and little 
birds. Only in the garden of the Selfish Giant it was still Win ter. The birds did not 
care to sing in it as there were no children, and the trees for got to blossom. Once a 
beautiful flower put its head out from the grass, but when it s aw the notice-board it 
was so sorry for the children that it slipped back into the gro und again, and went off 
to sleep. The only people who were pleased were the Snow and the Frost. ‘Spring has 
forgotten this garden,’ they cried, ‘so we will live here all t he year round.’ The Snow 

=== PAGE 202 ===

English: Grade 11 195
covered up the grass with her great white cloak, 
and the Frost painted all the trees silver. Then they 
invited the North Wind to stay with them, and he 
came. He was wrapped in furs, and he roared all 
day about the garden, and blew the chimney-pots 
down. ‘This is a delightful spot,’ he said, ‘we must 
ask the Hail on a visit.’ So the Hail came. Every 
day for three hours he rattled on the roof of the 
castle till he broke most of the slates, and then he 
ran round and round the garden as fast as he could 
go. He was dressed in grey, and his breath was 
like ice.
‘I cannot understand why the Spring is so late in 
coming,’ said the Selfish Giant, as he sat at the window and lo oked out at his cold 
white garden; ‘I hope there will be a change in the weather.’
But the Spring never came, nor the Summer. The Autumn gave gold en fruit to every 
garden, but to the Giant’s garden she gave none. ‘He is too selfish,’ she said. So it was 
always Winter there, and the North Wind, and the Hail, and the Frost, and the Snow 
danced about through the trees.
One morning the Giant was lying awake in bed when he heard some  lovely music. It 
sounded so sweet to his ears that he thought it must be the King’s musicians passing by. 
It was really only a little linnet singing outside his window, but it was so long since he 
had heard a bird sing in his garden that it seemed to him to be the most beautiful music 
in the world. Then the Hail stopped dancing over his head, and the North Wind ceased 
roaring, and a delicious perfume came to him through the open c asement. ‘I believe 
the Spring has come at last,’ said the Giant; and he jumped out of bed and looked out.
What did he see?
He saw a most wonderful sight. Through a little hole in the wall the children had crept 
in, and they were sitting in the branches of the trees. In ever y tree that he could see 
there was a little child. And the trees were so glad to have the children back again that 
they had covered themselves with blossoms, and were waving their arms gently above 
the children’s heads. The birds were flying about and twitterin g with delight, and the 
flowers were looking up through the green grass and laughing. I t was a lovely scene, 
only in one corner it was still Winter. It was the farthest corner of the garden, and in it 


=== PAGE 203 ===

 English: Grade 11 196
was standing a little boy. He was so small that he could not reach up to the branches of 
the tree, and he was wandering all round it, crying bitterly. The poor tree was still quite 
covered with Frost and Snow, and the North Wind was blowing and  roaring above it. 
‘Climb up! little boy,’ said the Tree, and it bent its branches  down as low as it could; 
but the little boy was too tiny.
And the Giant’s heart melted as he looked out. ‘How selfish I have been!’ he said; ‘now 
I know why the Spring would not come here. I will put that poor  little boy on the top 
of the tree, and then I will knock down the wall, and my garden shall be the children’s 
playground forever and ever.’ He was really very sorry for what he had done.
So he crept downstairs and opened the front door quite softly, and went out into the 
garden. But when the children saw him they were so frightened that they all ran away, 
and the garden became Winter again. Only the little boy did not run, for his eyes were 
so full of tears that he did not see the Giant coming. And the Giant stole up behind him 
and took him gently in his hand, and put him up into the tree. And the tree broke at 
once into blossom, and the birds came and sang on it, and the l ittle boy stretched out 
his two arms and flung them round the Giant’s neck, and kissed him. And the other 
children, when they saw that the Giant was not wicked any longer, came running back, 
and with them came the Spring. ‘It is your garden now, little children,’ said the Giant, 
and he took a great axe and knocked down the wall. And when the people were going 
to market at twelve o’clock, they found the Giant playing with the children in the most 
beautiful garden they had ever seen.
All day long they played, and in the evening they came to the Giant to bid him good-bye.
‘But where is your little companion?’ he said: ‘the boy I put i nto the tree.’ The Giant 
loved him the best because he had kissed him.
‘We don’t know,’ answered the children; ‘he has gone away.’
‘You must tell him to be sure and come here tomorrow,’ said the Giant. But the children 
said that they did not know where he lived, and had never seen him before; and the 
Giant felt very sad.
Every afternoon, when school was over, the children came and played with the Giant. 
But the little boy whom the Giant loved was never seen again. The Giant was very kind 
to all the children, yet he longed for his first little friend, and often spoke of him. ‘How 
I would like to see him!’ he used to say.
Years passed, and the Giant grew very old and feeble. He could not play about any 

=== PAGE 204 ===

English: Grade 11 197
more, so he sat in a huge armchair, and watched the children at  their games, and 
admired his garden. ‘I have many beautiful flowers,’ he said; ‘but the children are the 
most beautiful flowers of all.’
One winter morning he looked out of his window as he was dressi ng. He did not hate 
the Winter now, for he knew that it was merely the Spring asleep, and that the flowers 
were resting.
Suddenly he rubbed his eyes in wonder, and looked and looked. I t certainly was a 
marvellous sight. In the farthest corner of the garden was a tr ee quite covered with 
lovely white blossoms. Its branches were all golden, and silver  fruit hung down from 
them, and underneath it stood the little boy he had loved.
Downstairs ran the Giant in great joy, and out into the garden. He hastened across the 
grass, and came near to the child. And when he came quite close his face grew red with 
anger, and he said, ‘Who hath dared to wound thee?’ For on the palms of the child’s 
hands were the prints of two nails, and the prints of two nails were on the little feet.
‘Who hath dared to wound thee?’ cried the Giant; ‘tell me, that  I may take my big 
sword and slay him.’
‘Nay!’ answered the child; ‘but these are the wounds of Love.’
‘Who art thou?’ said the Giant, and a strange awe fell on him, and he knelt before the 
little child.
And the child smiled on the Giant, and said to him, ‘You let me  play once in your 
garden, today you shall come with me to my garden, which is Paradise.’
And when the children ran in that afternoon, they found the Giant lying dead under the 
tree, all covered with white blossoms.
Glossary
awe (n.): feeling of respect and slight fear
blossoms (n.): mass of flowers
cease(v.): stop happening or existing
cloak (n.): a thing that covers something
crept (v.): crawled
feeble (adj.): very weak
gruff (adj.): unfriendly, hoarse-voiced

=== PAGE 205 ===

 English: Grade 11 198
hastened (v.): acted without delay
hath (old English word): has
linnet (n.): a small brown and grey bird
marvellous (adj.): wonderful
ogre (n.): a brutish giant
rattled (v.): made a series of short loud sounds that of hailstones
slay (v.): kill
thee (old English word): you (object)
thou (old English word): you (subject)
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. Where did the children use to play?
b. What did the Snow and the Frost do to the garden?
c. What did the giant hear when he was lying awake in bed?
d. Why do you think spring season never came to the giant's gar den?
e. How did the giant realise his mistake?
 Reference to the context 
A. Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.
a. “How happy we were there!” they said to each other.
i. Where does ‘there’ refer to?
ii. What does ‘they’ refer to?
iii. Why are they saying so?
b. “I have many beautiful flowers,” he said; “but the children are the most beautiful 
flowers of all.”
i. Who is the speaker?
ii. Who is he speaking to?
iii. Who are ‘the children’ that the speaker is referring to?
iv. Why is the speaker saying that ‘the children are the most b eautiful flowers 
of all’?
c. When the little child smiled at the Giant, and said to him, "You let me play once 

=== PAGE 206 ===

English: Grade 11 199
in your garden, today you shall come with me to my garden, whic h is Paradise," 
shortly afterwards, the happy giant dies. What is the coinciden ce of this event? 
Describe it in relation to this fairy tale.
B. The story makes use of personification as one of the main fi gures of 
speech. Cite three examples of personification from the story. What is 
the significance of the seasons personified in the story?
C. This story can be read as a fairytale, where the children, t he seasons, 
the tree, the corner of the garden, the snow, the wind and the frost are 
all used as symbolism. Interpret those symbols.
D. Which figure of speech is used for ‘winter, frost, snow, nor th wind, 
hail and little child’? Who is the little child compared to?
 Reference beyond the text 
a. What is the main theme of this story?
b. Does God punish those who are cruel to children and very sel fish? 

=== PAGE 207 ===

 English: Grade 11 200
2 The Oval Portrait
Edgar Allan Poe
  Before Reading 
a. Which of the following emotions do you anticipate experienci ng while you are 
reading The Oval Portrait? Tick the relevant boxes and write the corresponding 
adjectives next to the nouns.
 joy .....................  happiness .......................
 fear ....................  annoyance .......................
 compassion .....................  sadness .......................
 pity .....................  terror .......................
 enthusiasm .....................  surprise ......................
b. Portraits have the power to connect us with other humans thr ough the face. 
Whose face do you expect the portrait of this story to be of? Tick (√) the box you 
expect from the following list.
 Poe himself 
 his wife
 a beautiful woman
 a well-known person in Poe’s time 
 an unknown man or a woman 
 a saint or a martyr
Edgar Allan Poe (1809-1849) was an American writer, 
poet, literary critic and editor. Poe is best known for 
his poetry and short stories. He is widely regarded as a 
central figure of Romanticism in the United States and 
of the American literature as a whole. He is generally 
considered the inventor of the detective fiction and 
is further credited with contributing to the emerging 
genre of science fiction. He is famous for his dark, 
mysterious poems and stories, including The Raven, 
The Black Cat, The Fall of the House of Usher, and 


=== PAGE 208 ===

English: Grade 11 201
Heart. His tale The Murders in the Rue Morgue (1841) initiated the modern detective 
story, and the atmosphere in his tales of horror is unrivaled i n American fiction. 
His The Raven (1845) is among the best-known poems in the national literature.
'The Oval Portrait'  was first published as a longer version titled ‘Life in Death’  
in Graham's Magazine in 1842. The shorter version, renamed ‘The Oval Portrait’  
was published in the April 26, 1845 edition of the Broadway Journal. This is the story 
of an artist who wants to make a painting of his young wife, but becomes so obsessed 
with it that he doesn’t realize his wife is dying meanwhile. This is a short horror story 
about the relationship between art and life, through the narrator’s encounter with the 
oval portrait of a young woman in a chateau in the Appenines.
Reading
The chateau into which my valet had ventured to make forcible e ntrance, rather than 
permit me, in my desperately wounded condition, to pass a night in the open air, was one 
of those piles of commingled gloom and grandeur which have so long frowned among 
the Appennines, not less in fact than in the fancy of Mrs. Radcliffe. To all appearance, 
it had been temporarily and very lately abandoned. We established ourselves in one of 
the smallest and least sumptuously furnished apartments. It lay in a remote turret of the 
building. Its decorations were rich, yet tattered and antique. Its walls were hung with 
tapestry and bedecked with manifold and multiform armorial trop hies, together with 
an unusually great number of very spirited modern paintings in frames of rich golden 
arabesque. In these paintings, which depended from the walls no t only in their main 
surfaces, but in very many nooks which the bizarre architecture of the chateau rendered 
necessary - in these paintings my incipient delirium, perhaps, had caused me to take 
deep interest; so that I bade Pedro to close the heavy shutters of the room - since it was 
already night - to light the tongues of a tall candelabrum which stood by the head of my 
bed - and to throw open far and wide the fringed curtains of black velvet which enveloped 
the bed itself. I wished all this done that I might resign myself, if not to sleep, at least 
alternately to the contemplation of these pictures, and the perusal of a small volume which 
had been found upon the pillow, and which purported to criticis e and describe them.
Long - long I read - and devoutly, devotedly I gazed. Rapidly and gloriously the hours 
flew by and the deep midnight came. The position of the candela brum displeased 
me, and outreaching my hand with difficulty, rather than distur b my 
slumbering valet, I placed it so as to throw its rays more full y upon the book.
But the action produced an effect altogether unanticipated. The  rays of the numerous 
candles (for there were many) now fell within a niche of the room which had hitherto 

=== PAGE 209 ===

 English: Grade 11 202
been thrown into deep shade by one of the bed-posts. I thus saw in vivid light a picture 
all unnoticed before. It was the portrait of a young girl just ripening into womanhood. 
I glanced at the painting hurriedly, and then closed my eyes. W hy I did this was not 
at first apparent even to my own perception. But while my lids remained thus shut, I 
ran over in my mind my reason for so shutting them. It was an i mpulsive movement 
to gain time for thought - to make sure that my vision had not deceived me - to calm 
and subdue my fancy for a more sober and more certain gaze. In a very few moments 
I again looked fixedly at the painting.
That I now saw aright I could not and 
would not doubt; for the first flashing 
of the candles upon that canvas had 
seemed to dissipate the dreamy stupor 
which was stealing over my senses, and 
to startle me at once into waking life.
The portrait, I have already said, was that 
of a young girl. It was a mere head and 
shoulders, done in what is technically 
termed a vignette manner; much in the 
style of the favourite heads of Sully. The 
arms, the bosom, and even the ends of the 
radiant hair melted imperceptibly into the 
vague yet deep shadow which formed the 
background of the whole. The frame was oval, richly gilded and filigreed in Moresque. 
As a thing of art nothing could be more admirable than the pain ting itself. But it 
could have been neither the execution of the work, nor the immo rtal beauty of the 
countenance, which had so suddenly and so vehemently moved me. Least of all, 
could it have been that my fancy, shaken from its half slumber,  had mistaken the 
head for that of a living person. I saw at once that the peculi arities of the design, of 
the vignetting, and of the frame, must have instantly dispelled  such idea - must have 
prevented even its momentary entertainment. Thinking earnestly upon these points, 
I remained, for an hour perhaps, half sitting, half reclining, with my vision riveted 
upon the portrait. At length, satisfied with the true secret of  its effect, I fell back 
within the bed. I had found the spell of the picture in an abso lute life-likeliness of 
expression, which, at first startling, finally confounded, subd ued, and appalled me. 
With deep and reverent awe, I replaced the candelabrum in its f ormer position. The 


=== PAGE 210 ===

English: Grade 11 203
cause of my deep agitation being thus shut from view, I sought eagerly the volume 
which discussed the paintings and their histories. Turning to t he number which 
designated the oval portrait, I there read the vague and quaint  words which follow:
"She was a maiden of rarest beauty, and not more lovely than fu ll of glee. And evil 
was the hour when she saw, and loved, and wedded the painter. H e, passionate, 
studious, austere, and having already a bride in his Art; she a maiden of rarest beauty, 
and not more lovely than full of glee; all light and smiles, an d frolicsome as the 
young fawn; loving and cherishing all things; hating only the Art which was her rival; 
dreading only the pallet and brushes and other untoward instrum ents which deprived 
her of the countenance of her lover. It was thus a terrible thi ng for this lady to hear 
the painter speak of his desire to portray even his young bride . But she was humble 
and obedient, and sat meekly for many weeks in the dark, high t urret-chamber where 
the light dripped upon the pale canvas only from overhead. But he, the painter, took 
glory in his work, which went on from hour to hour, and from da y to day. And he 
was a passionate, and wild, and moody man, who became lost in r everies; so that 
he would not see that the light which fell so ghastly in that l one turret withered the 
health and the spirits of his bride, who pined visibly to all b ut him. Yet she smiled 
on and still on, uncomplainingly, because she saw that the pain ter (who had high 
renown) took a fervid and burning pleasure in his task, and wro ught day and night to 
depict her who so loved him, yet who grew daily more dispirited  and weak. And in 
sooth some who beheld the portrait spoke of its resemblance in low words, as of a 
mighty marvel, and a proof not less of the power of the painter  than of his deep love 
for her whom he depicted so surpassingly well. But at length, a s the labour drew 
nearer to its conclusion, there were admitted none into the tur ret; for the painter had 
grown wild with the ardour of his work, and turned his eyes fro m canvas merely, 
even to regard the countenance of his wife. And he would not see that the tints which 
he spread upon the canvas were drawn from the cheeks of her who  sat beside him. 
And when many weeks had passed, and but little remained to do, save one brush 
upon the mouth and one tint upon the eye, the spirit of the lad y again flickered up as 
the flame within the socket of the lamp. And then the brush was  given, and then the 
tint was placed; and, for one moment, the painter stood entranc ed before the work 
which he had wrought; but in the next, while he yet gazed, he g rew tremulous and 
very pallid, and aghast, and crying with a loud voice, 'This is  indeed Life itself!' 
turned suddenly to regard his beloved:  She was dead!

=== PAGE 211 ===

 English: Grade 11 204
NOTES
Mrs. Radcliffe : Ann Radcliffe (1764-1823) was an English author and pioneer of  
Gothic fiction. Gothic fiction is a style of writing that is characterized 
by elements of fear, horror, death, and gloom, as well as roman ce, 
revolved around a large, ancient house such as castles or monasteries.
Appennines :  Apennine Mountains - a mountain range in Italy
Glossary
ardour (n.): enthusiasm or passion
chateau (n.): a large French country house or castle
contemplation (n.): the action of looking thoughtfully at something for a long time
countenance (n.): face, look or appearance
frolicsome (adj.): lively and playful
ghastly (adj.): causing great horror or fear; frightful
glee (n.): a strong feeling of happiness; great pleasure or satisfaction
gloom (n.): partial or total darkness; a state of hopelessness
niche (n.): suitable position
reverent (adj.): feeling or showing deep respect
stupor (n.): a state of reduced consciousness or sensibility
sumptuously (adv.): in a way that is impressive and seems expensive
tapestry (n.): a piece of thick handwoven textile fabric with pictures used for hangings
tremulous (adj.): shaking or quivering slightly
valet (n.): a man’s male servant
vehemently (adv.): in a forceful, passionate or intense manner
vignette (n.): a small portrait photograph fading into its background
 Understanding the text 
Answer these questions.
a. Where did the narrator and his servant make forcible entranc e?
b. Which special picture did the narrator notice in the room?
c. Describe the portrait that the narrator saw in the room.
d. What is the relationship between the portrait painter and it s subject?

=== PAGE 212 ===

English: Grade 11 205
 Reference to the context 
a. What is the central theme of the story? Who is the woman dep icted in the oval 
portrait?
b. "The Oval Portrait" is a short horror story by Edgar Allan P oe involving the 
disturbing circumstances surrounding a portrait in a chateau. Elaborate. 
c. "The Oval Portrait" suggests that the woman's beauty condemn s her to death. 
Discuss.
d. Discuss the story as a frame narrative (a story within a sto ry).
e. The story is told in a descriptive style, with plenty of ima gery and symbolism. 
Which images and symbols do you find in the story?
f. What does the expression “She was dead!” mean?
 Reference beyond the text 
a. Do you think there is life in art?
b. As a thing of art nothing could be more admirable than the p ainting itself. 
Explain.
c. A more intense look at the painting reveals the illusion. Ha ve you noticed any 
such painting?

=== PAGE 213 ===

 English: Grade 11 206
3 God Sees the Truth but Waits
Leo Tolstoy
  Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. What does the title of the story mean?
b. Is it fair to punish the innocent people in the name of just ice?
c. Do you believe dreams might predict the terrible fate of a p erson? 
Leo Tolstoy (1828-1910) was a Russian writer and a 
master of realistic fiction. He was born in a wealthy 
family in Russia. His parents died when he was a child. 
He was brought up by his elder brothers and relatives. 
He studied languages and law at Kazan University for 
three years. He was dissatisfied with the school and 
left Kazan without a degree. Then he returned to his 
estate and educated himself independently.
In 1848, he moved to the capital, St. Petersburg, where he passed two tests for a law 
degree. He took military training and became an Army officer. H e wrote his first 
novel Childhood (1852), which became a success. With writing Boyhood (1854) and 
Youth (1857), he concluded the autobiographical trilogy. He also wro te Sevastopol 
Sketches (1855), based upon his experiences in the Crimean War. He primarily wrote 
novels and short stories. Later in his life, he also wrote play s and essays. He is best 
known for the novels War and Peace (1869) and Anna Karenina (1877). His fiction 
includes dozens of short stories and several novellas such as The Death of Ivan Ilyich 
(1886), Family Happiness (1859), and Hadji Murad (1912). During his last three 
decades, Tolstoy also achieved world renown as a moral and religious teacher. 
Tolstoy’s short story 'God Sees the Truth, but Waits' first published in 1872 is about 
the false conviction and imprisonment of a man for a murder he did not commit, and 
it takes the form of a parable for forgiveness.
Reading
In the town of Vladimir lived a young merchant named Ivan Dmitr ich Aksionov. He 
had two shops and a house of his own.


=== PAGE 214 ===

English: Grade 11 207
Aksionov was a handsome, fair-haired, curly-headed fellow, full of fun, and very fond 
of singing. When quite a young man he had been given to drink, and was riotous when 
he had had too much; but after he married he gave up drinking, except now and then.
One summer Aksionov was going to the Nizhny Fair, and as he bad e good-bye to his 
family, his wife said to him, "Ivan Dmitrich, do not start today; I have had a bad dream 
about you."
Aksionov laughed, and said, "You are afraid that when I get to the fair I shall go on a 
spree."
His wife replied: "I do not know what I am afraid of; all I kno w is that I had a bad 
dream. I dreamt you returned from the town, and when you took o ff your cap I saw 
that your hair was quite grey."
Aksionov laughed. "That's a lucky sign," said he. "See if I don't sell out all my goods, 
and bring you some presents from the fair."
So he said good-bye to his family, and drove away.
When he had travelled half-way, he met a merchant whom he knew,  and they put up 
at the same inn for the night. They had some tea together, and then went to bed in 
adjoining rooms.
It was not Aksionov's habit to sleep late, and, wishing to travel while it was still cool, 
he aroused his driver before dawn, and told him to put in the horses.
Then he made his way across to the landlord of the inn (who liv ed in a cottage at the 
back), paid his bill, and continued his journey.
When he had gone about twenty-five miles, he stopped for the ho rses to be fed. 
Aksionov rested awhile in the passage of the inn, then he stepp ed out into the porch, 
and, ordering a samovar to be heated, got out his guitar and began to play.
Suddenly a troika drove up with tinkling bells and an official alighted, followed by 
two soldiers. He came to Aksionov and began to question him, asking him who he was 
and whence he came. Aksionov answered him fully, and said, "Won 't you have some 
tea with me?" But the official went on cross-questioning him and asking him. "Where 
did you spend last night? Were you alone, or with a fellow-merchant? Did you see the 
other merchant this morning? Why did you leave the inn before dawn?"
Aksionov wondered why he was asked all these questions, but he described all that 
had happened, and then added, "Why do you cross-question me as if I were a thief or 

=== PAGE 215 ===

 English: Grade 11 208
a robber? I am travelling on business of my own, and there is no need to question me."
Then the official, calling the soldiers, said, "I am the police-officer of this district, and 
I question you because the merchant with whom you spent last ni ght has been found 
with his throat cut. We must search your things."
They entered the house. The soldiers and the police-officer uns trapped Aksionov's 
luggage and searched it. Suddenly the officer drew a knife out of a bag, crying, "Whose 
knife is this?"
Aksionov looked, and seeing a blood-stained knife taken from hi s bag, he was 
frightened.
"How is it there is blood on this knife?"
Aksionov tried to answer, but could hardly utter a word, and only stammered: "I--don't 
know--not mine." Then the police-officer said: "This morning the merchant was found 
in bed with his throat cut. You are the only person who could have done it. The house 
was locked from inside, and no one else was there. Here is this blood-stained knife in 
your bag and your face and manner betray you! Tell me how you killed him, and how 
much money you stole?"
Aksionov swore he had not done it; that he had not seen the mer chant after they had 
had tea together; that he had no money except eight thousand ru bles of his own, and 
that the knife was not his. But his voice was broken, his face pale, and he trembled 
with fear as though he went guilty.
The police-officer ordered the soldiers to bind Aksionov and to  put him in the cart. 
As they tied his feet together and flung him into the cart, Aks ionov crossed himself 
and wept. His money and goods were taken from him, and he was s ent to the nearest 
town and imprisoned there. Enquiries as to his character were m ade in Vladimir. The 
merchants and other inhabitants of that town said that in former days he used to drink 
and waste his time, but that he was a good man. Then the trial came on: he was charged 
with murdering a merchant from Ryazan, and robbing him of twenty thousand rubles.
His wife was in despair, and did not know what to believe. Her children were all quite 
small; one was a baby at her breast. Taking them all with her, she went to the town 
where her husband was in jail. At first she was not allowed to see him; but after much 
begging, she obtained permission from the officials, and was ta ken to him. When she 
saw her husband in prison-dress and in chains, shut up with thieves and criminals, she 
fell down, and did not come to her senses for a long time. Then she drew her children 

=== PAGE 216 ===

English: Grade 11 209
to her, and sat down near him. She told him of things at home, and asked about what 
had happened to him. He told her all, and she asked, "What can we do now?"
"We must petition the Czar not to let an innocent man perish."
His wife told him that she had sent a petition to the Czar, but it had not been accepted.
Aksionov did not reply, but only looked downcast.
Then his wife said, "It was not for nothing I dreamt your hair had turned grey. You 
remember? You should not have started that day." And passing her fingers through his 
hair, she said: "Vanya dearest, tell your wife the truth; was it not you who did it?"
"So you, too, suspect me!" said Aksionov, and, hiding his face in his hands, he began 
to weep. Then a soldier came to say that the wife and children must go away; and 
Aksionov said good-bye to his family for the last time.
When they were gone, Aksionov recalled what had been said, and when he remembered 
that his wife also had suspected him, he said to himself, "It s eems that only God can 
know the truth; it is to Him alone we must appeal, and from Him alone expect mercy."
And Aksionov wrote no more petitions; gave up all hope, and only prayed to God.
Aksionov was condemned to be flogged and sent to the mines. So he was flogged with 
a knot, and when the wounds made by the knot were healed, he wa s driven to Siberia 
with other convicts.
For twenty-six years Aksionov lived as a convict in Siberia. Hi s hair turned white 
as snow, and his beard grew long, thin, and grey. All his mirth  went; he stooped; he 
walked slowly, spoke little, and never laughed, but he often prayed.
In prison, Aksionov learnt to make boots, and earned a little m oney, with which he 
bought The Lives of the Saints. He read this book when there was light enough in the 
prison; and on Sundays in the prison-church he read the lessons and sang in the choir; 
for his voice was still good.
The prison authorities liked Aksionov for his meekness, and his  fellow-prisoners 
respected him: they called him "Grandfather," and "The Saint." When they wanted 
to petition the prison authorities about anything, they always made Aksionov their 
spokesman, and when there were quarrels among the prisoners they came to him to put 
things right, and to judge the matter.
No news reached Aksionov from his home, and he did not even kno w if his wife and 
children were still alive.

=== PAGE 217 ===

 English: Grade 11 210
One day a fresh gang of convicts came to the prison. In the eve ning the old prisoners 
collected round the new ones and asked them what towns or villa ges they came 
from, and what they were sentenced for. Among the rest Aksionov  sat down near the 
newcomers, and listened with downcast air to what was said.
One of the new convicts, a tall, strong man of sixty, with a closely-cropped grey beard, 
was telling the others what he had been arrested for.
"Well, friends," he said, "I only took a horse that was tied to  a sledge, and I was 
arrested and accused of stealing. I said I had only taken it to get home quicker, and had 
then let it go; besides, the driver was a personal friend of mine. So I said, 'It's all right.' 
'No,' said they, 'you stole it.' But how or where I stole it they could not say. I once really 
did something wrong, and ought by rights to have come here long ago, but that time I 
was not found out. Now I have been sent here for nothing at all ... Eh, but it's lies I'm 
telling you; I've been to Siberia before, but I did not stay long."
"Where are you from?" asked some one.
"From Vladimir. My family are of that town. My name is Makar, and they also call me 
Semyonich."
Aksionov raised his head and said: "Tell me, Semyonich, do you know anything of the 
merchants Aksionov of Vladimir? Are they still alive?"
"Know them? Of course I do. The Aksionovs are rich, though their father is in Siberia: 
a sinner like ourselves, it seems! As for you, Gran'dad, how did you come here?"
Aksionov did not like to speak of his misfortune. He only sighe d, and said, "For my 
sins I have been in prison these twenty-six years."
"What sins?" asked Makar Semyonich.
But Aksionov only said, "Well, well--I must have deserved it!" He would have said no 
more, but his companions told the newcomers how Aksionov came t o be in Siberia; 
how someone had killed a merchant, and had put the knife among Aksionov's things, 
and Aksionov had been unjustly condemned.
When Makar Semyonich heard this, he looked at Aksionov, slapped his own knee, and 
exclaimed, "Well, this is wonderful! Really wonderful! But how old you've grown, 
Gran'dad!"
The others asked him why he was so surprised, and where he had seen Aksionov 
before; but Makar Semyonich did not reply. He only said: "It's wonderful that we 

=== PAGE 218 ===

English: Grade 11 211
should meet here, lads!"
These words made Aksionov wonder whether this man knew who had killed the 
merchant; so he said, "Perhaps, Semyonich, you have heard of th at affair, or maybe 
you've seen me before?"
"How could I help hearing? The world's full of rumours. But it' s a long time ago, and 
I've forgotten what I heard."
"Perhaps you heard who killed the merchant?" asked Aksionov.
Makar Semyonich laughed, and replied: "It must have been him in whose bag the knife 
was found! If someone else hid the knife there, 'He's not a thief till he's caught,' as the 
saying is. How could anyone put a knife into your bag while it was under your head? 
It would surely have woken you up."
When Aksionov heard these words, he felt sure this was the man who had killed the 
merchant. He rose and went away. All that night Aksionov lay awake. He felt terribly 
unhappy, and all sorts of images rose in his mind. There was th e image of his wife as 
she was when he parted from her to go to the fair. He saw her a s if she were present; 
her face and her eyes rose before him; he heard her speak and l augh. Then he saw his 
children, quite little, as they were at that time: one with a little cloak on, another at his 
mother's breast. And then he remembered himself as he used to b e-young and merry. 
He remembered how he sat playing the guitar in the porch of the  inn where he was 
arrested, and how free from care he had been. He saw, in his mind, the place where he 
was flogged, the executioner, and the people standing around; the chains, the convicts, 
all the twenty-six years of his prison life, and his premature old age. The thought of it 
all made him so wretched that he was ready to kill himself.
"And it's all that villain's doing!" thought Aksionov. And his anger was so great against 
Makar Semyonich that he longed for vengeance, even if he himself should perish for it. 
He kept repeating prayers all night, but could get no peace. During the day he did not 
go near Makar Semyonich, nor even look at him.
A fortnight passed in this way. Aksionov could not sleep at night, and was so miserable 
that he did not know what to do.
One night as he was walking about the prison, he noticed some earth that came rolling 
out from under one of the shelves on which the prisoners slept. He stopped to see what 
it was. Suddenly Makar Semyonich crept out from under the shelf , and looked up at 
Aksionov with frightened face. Aksionov tried to pass without l ooking at him, but 

=== PAGE 219 ===

 English: Grade 11 212
Makar seized his hand and told him that he had dug a hole under  the wall, getting rid 
of the earth by putting it into his high-boots, and emptying it out every day on the road 
when the prisoners were driven to their work.
"Just you keep quiet, old man, and you shall get out too. If you blab, they'll flog the life 
out of me, but I will kill you first."
Aksionov trembled with anger as he looked at his enemy. He drew  his hand away, 
saying, "I have no wish to escape, and you have no need to kill me; you killed me long 
ago! As to telling of you--I may do so or not, as God shall direct."
Next day, when the convicts were led out to work, the convoy soldiers noticed that one 
or other of the prisoners emptied some earth out of his boots. The prison was searched 
and the tunnel found. The Governor came and questioned all the prisoners to find out 
who had dug the hole. They all denied any knowledge of it. Thos e who knew would 
not betray Makar Semyonich, knowing he would be flogged almost to death. At last 
the Governor turned to Aksionov whom he knew to be a just man, and said:
"You are a truthful old man; tell me, before God, who dug the hole?"
Makar Semyonich stood as if he were quite unconcerned, looking at the Governor and 
not so much as glancing at Aksionov. Aksionov's lips and hands trembled, and for a 
long time he could not utter a word. He thought, "Why should I screen him who ruined 
my life? Let him pay for what I have suffered. But if I tell, they will probably flog the 
life out of him, and maybe I suspect him wrongly. And, after al l, what good would it 
be to me?"
"Well, old man," repeated the Governor, "tell me the truth: who has been digging under 
the wall?"
Aksionov glanced at Makar Semyonich, and said, "I cannot say, your honour. It is not 
God's will that I should tell! Do what you like with me; I am your hands."
However much the Governor tried, Aksionov would say no more, an d so the matter 
had to be left.
That night, when Aksionov was lying on his bed and just beginning to doze, someone 
came quietly and sat down on his bed. He peered through the darkness and recognised 
Makar.
"What more do you want of me?" asked Aksionov. "Why have you come here?"
Makar Semyonich was silent. So Aksionov sat up and said, "What do you want? Go 

=== PAGE 220 ===

English: Grade 11 213
away, or I will call the guard!"
Makar Semyonich bent close over Aksionov, and whispered, "Ivan Dmitrich, forgive 
me!"
"What for?" asked Aksionov.
"It was I who killed the merchant and hid the knife among your things. I meant to kill 
you too, but I heard a noise outside, so I hid the knife in you r bag and escaped out of 
the window."
Aksionov was silent, and did not know what to say. Makar Semyonich slid off the bed-
shelf and knelt upon the ground. "Ivan Dmitrich," said he, "forgive me! For the love of 
God, forgive me! I will confess that it was I who killed the merchant, and you will be 
released and can go to your home."
"It is easy for you to talk," said Aksionov, "but I have suffered for you these twenty-six 
years. Where could I go to now?... My wife is dead, and my chil dren have forgotten 
me. I have nowhere to go..."
Makar Semyonich did not rise, but beat his head on the floor. "Ivan Dmitrich, forgive 
me!" he cried. "When they flogged me with the knot it was not so hard to bear as it is 
to see you now ... yet you had pity on me, and did not tell. For God's sake forgive me, 
wretch that I am!" And he began to sob.
When Aksionov heard him sobbing he, too, began to weep. "God wi ll forgive you!" 
said he. "Maybe I am a hundred times worse than you." And at th ese words his heart 
grew light, and the longing for home left him. He no longer had any desire to leave the 
prison, but only hoped for his last hour to come.
In spite of what Aksionov had said, Makar Semyonich confessed, his guilt. But when 
the order for his release came, Aksionov was already dead.
Glossary
alight (v.): come down from a horse or vehicle
confess (v.): admit or state that one has committed a crime
convict (n.): a person found guilty of a criminal offense and serving a sent ence of 
prison
Czar (n.): emperor, specifically the ruler of Russia until the 1917 revolution
despair (n.): absence of hope
flog (v.): beat (someone) with a whip or stick as punishment or torture

=== PAGE 221 ===

 English: Grade 11 214
inn (n.): an establishment for the lodging and entertaining of travellers
knot (n.): a fastening made by tying a piece of string, rope, or something similar
mercy (n.): pity, compassion or forgiveness shown toward someone
mirth (n.): fun and enjoyment as shown by laughter
perish (v.): suffer death, typically in a violent, sudden, or untimely way
petition (v.): make a formal request to (an authority) with respect to a particular cause
riotous (adj.): involving public disorder; out of control; unruly
spree (n.): unrestrained activity of drinking alcohol
tinkle (v.): make or cause to make a light, clear ringing sound
troika (n.): a Russian vehicle drawn by three horses abreast
 Understanding the text 
Answer these questions.
a. What bad habits did Aksionov have before his marriage? 
b. What can be the meaning of his wife's dream?
c. Why did Aksionov think of killing himself?
d. Why did Makar disclose that he had killed the merchant?
e. Why doesn't Aksionov wish to return to his family at the end  of the story?
 Reference to the context 
a. "Well, old man," repeated the Governor, "tell me the truth: who has been digging 
under the wall?"
i. Who is that old man?
ii. Which truth is the speaker asking about?
iii. Which wall does the speaker mean?
b. Describe Aksionov's character.
c. What is the theme of the story?
d. Which symbols are used in the story and what do they indicat e?
 Reference beyond the text 
a. What role does religion play in Aksionov's life? How does he  undergo a spiritual 
transformation in the story?
b. What does the story tell us about the existence of unfair sy stem of justice?

=== PAGE 222 ===

English: Grade 11 215
4 The Wish
Roald Dahl
  Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. What frightens you? Snakes, spiders, or any other things? 
b. What do you do about frightening things: face them or avoid them? 
c. Do you have any frightening event in your childhood? Share i t with the class.
Roald Dahl (1916-1990) was a British novelist, 
short story writer and screenwriter. He was born 
in Wales of Norwegian immigrant parents. He 
spent his childhood in England and, at the age of 
eighteen, went to work for the Shell Oil Company 
in Africa. When the World War II broke out, he 
joined the Royal Air Force and became a fighter 
pilot.
At the age of twenty-six he moved to Washington, D.C., and bega n to write. After 
establishing himself as a writer for adults, he began writing c hildren’s stories in 
1960 while living in England with his family. He is now conside red one of the most 
beloved storytellers of our time. His fantastic novels include James and the Giant 
Peach, Matilda, and Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, and many more classics for 
children, along with short stories for adults.
The story 'The Wish' is about a young boy's fantasy in which his carpet is alive wi th 
snakes and fire. Using imagery and metaphor, Dahl uses the character of a curiously 
imaginative young boy to help us reflect on the delicacy of our childhood innocence. 
This story goes inside the mind of a young child to explore his  imagination. This is 
about a young boy who had a frightening event in his childhood.
Reading
Under the palm of one hand, the child became aware of the scab of an old cut on his 
kneecap. He bent forward to examine it closely. A scab was always a fascinating thing; 
it presented a special challenge he was never able to resist. 
Yes, he thought, I will pick it off, even if it isn't ready, ev en if the middle of it sticks, 


=== PAGE 223 ===

 English: Grade 11 216
even if it hurts like anything. 
With a fingernail, he began to explore cautiously around the edges of the scab. He got 
a nail underneath it, and when he raised it, but ever so slight ly, it suddenly came off, 
the whole hard brown scab came off beautifully, leaving an inte resting little circle of 
smooth red skin. 
Nice. Very nice indeed. He rubbed the circle and it didn't hurt. He picked up the scab, 
put it on his thigh and flipped it with a finger so that it fle w away and landed on the 
edge of the carpet, the enormous red and black and yellow carpe t that stretched the 
whole length of the hall from the stairs on which he sat to the front door in the distance. 
A tremendous carpet. Bigger than the tennis lawn. Much bigger than that. He regarded 
it gravely, setting his eyes upon it with mild pleasure. He had  never really noticed 
it before, but now, all of a sudden the colours seemed to brigh ten mysteriously and 
spring out at him in a most dazzling way. 
You see, he told himself, I know how it is. The red parts of th e carpet are red-hot 
lumps of coal. What I must do is this: I must walk all the way along it to the front door 
without touching them. If I touch the red, I will be burnt. As a matter of fact, I will be 
burnt up completely. And the black parts of the carpet... yes, the black parts are snakes, 
poisonous snakes, adders mostly, and cobras, thick like tree-tr unks round the middle, 
and if I touch one of them, I'll be bitten and I'll die before tea time. And if I get across 
safely, without being burnt and without being bitten, I will be  given a puppy for my 
birthday tomorrow.
He got to his feet and climbed higher up the stairs to obtain a  better view of this vast 
tapestry of colour and death. Was it possible? Was there enough  yellow? Yellow was 
the only colour he was allowed to walk on. Could it be done? Th is was not a journey 
to be undertaken lightly; the risks were far too great for that. The child's face—a fringe 
of white-gold hair, two large blue eyes, a small pointed chin p eered down anxiously 
over the banisters. The yellow was a bit thin in places and there were one or two widish 
gaps, but it did seem to go all the way along to the other end. For someone who had only 
yesterday triumphantly travelled the whole length of the brick path from the stables 
to the summer-house without touching the cracks, this carpet th ing should not be too 
difficult. Except for the snakes. The mere thought of snakes se nt a fine electricity of 
fear running like pins down the backs of his legs and under the soles of his feet. 
He came slowly down the stairs and advanced to the edge of the carpet. He extended 
one small sandalled foot and placed it cautiously upon a patch of yellow. Then he 

=== PAGE 224 ===

English: Grade 11 217
brought the other foot up, and there was just enough room for h im to stand with the 
two feet together. There! He had started! His bright oval face was curiously intent, 
a shade whiter perhaps than before, and he was holding his arms  out sideways to 
assist his balance. He took another step, lifting his foot high  over a patch of black, 
aiming carefully with his toe for a narrow channel of yellow on  the other side. When 
he had completed the second step he paused to rest, standing ve ry stiff and still. The 
narrow channel of yellow ran forward unbroken for at least five yards and he advanced 
gingerly along it, bit by bit, as though walking a tightrope. Where it finally curled off 
sideways, he had to take another long stride, this time over a vicious-looking mixture 
of black and red. Halfway across he began to wobble. He waved h is arms around 
wildly, windmill fashion, to keep his balance, and he got across safely and rested again 
on the other side. He was quite breathless now, and so tense he stood high on his toes 
all the time, arms out sideways, fists clenched. He was on a bi g safe island of yellow. 
There was lots of room on it, he couldn't possibly fall off, an d he stood there resting, 
hesitating, waiting, wishing he could stay for ever on this big  safe yellow island. But 
the fear of not getting the puppy compelled him to go on. 
Step by step, he edged further ahead, and between each one he paused to decide exactly 
where he should put his foot. Once, he had a choice of ways, ei ther to left or right, 
and he chose the left because although it seemed the more diffi cult, there was not so 
much black in that direction. The black was what had made him n ervous. He glanced 
quickly over his shoulder to see how far he had come. Nearly halfway. There could be 
no turning back now. He was in the middle and he couldn't turn back and he couldn't 
jump off sideways either because it was too far, and when he looked at all the red and 
all the black that lay ahead of him, he felt that old sudden si ckening surge of panic in 
his chest - like last Easter time, that afternoon when he got lost all alone in the darkest 
part of Piper's Wood. 
He took another step, placing his foot carefully upon the only little piece of yellow 
within reach, and this time the point of the foot came within a  centimetre of some 
black. It wasn't touching the black, he could see it wasn't tou ching, he could see the 
small line of yellow separating the toe of his sandal from the black; but the snake 
stirred as though sensing his nearness, and raised its head and  gazed at the foot with 
bright beady eyes, watching to see if it was going to touch.
 "I'm not touching you! You mustn't bite me! You know I'm not touching you!" 
Another snake slid up noiselessly beside the first, raised its head, two heads now, two 

=== PAGE 225 ===

 English: Grade 11 218
pairs of eyes staring at the foot, gazing at a little naked place just below the sandal strap 
where the skin showed through. The child went high up on his to es and stayed there, 
frozen stiff with terror. It was minutes before he dared to move again. 
The next step would have to be a really long one. There was this deep curling river of 
black that ran clear across the width of the carpet, and he was forced by his position to 
cross it at its widest part. He thought first of trying to jump it, but decided he couldn't 
be sure of landing accurately on the narrow band of yellow on the other side. He took 
a deep breath, lifted one foot, and inch by inch he pushed it out in front of him, far far 
out, then down and down until at last the tip of his sandal was across and resting safely 
on the edge of the yellow. He leaned forward, transferring his weight to his front foot. 
Then he tried to bring the back foot up as well. He strained an d pulled and jerked his 
body, but the legs were too wide apart and he couldn't make it.  He tried to get back 
again. He couldn't do that either. He was doing the splits and he was properly stuck. 
He glanced down and saw this deep curling river of black undern eath him. Parts of it 
were stirring now, and uncoiling and beginning to shine with a dreadfully oily glister. 
He wobbled, waved his arms frantically to keep his balance, but  that seemed to make 
it worse. He was starting to go over. He was going over to the right, quite slowly he 
was going over, then faster and faster, and at the last moment, instinctively he put out 
a hand to break the fall and the next thing he saw was this bare hand of his going right 
into the middle of a great glistening mass of black and he gave  one piercing cry as it 
touched. 
Outside in the sunshine, far away behind the house, the mother was looking for her 
son.
Glossary
adder (n.): a type of poisonous snake
beady (adj.): bright and penetrating 
doing the splits (idm.): spreading legs widely apart
frantically (adv.): in a panic and frightening way
fringe (n.): the front part of the hair which covers the forehead
gingerly (adv.): carefully
gravely (adv.): seriously
instinctively (adv.): unconsciously, by instinct
jerked (v.): made a sudden sharp movement
scab (n.): a piece of hard skin which covers a wound or cut

=== PAGE 226 ===

English: Grade 11 219
tapestry (n.): heavy woven cloth
triumphantly (adv.): successfully
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following the questions.
a. What did the child do to the scab on his knee?
b. What kind of effect did the carpet have on the child?
c. What was he afraid of while walking across the carpet?
d. What motivated and encouraged the child to start and continu e on his journey?
e. What did the child see as he looked down on the black patter ns of the carpet?
 Reference to the context 
a. The writer creates two voices in the story. Who are they?
b. Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.
“…the black parts are snakes, poisonous snakes, adders mostly, and cobras, thick 
like tree-trunks round the middle, and if I touch one of them, I'll be bitten and I'll 
die before tea time. And if I get across safely, without being burnt and without 
being bitten, I will be given a puppy for my birthday tomorrow.”
i. What does ‘the black part’ mean?
ii. Who is the speaker?
iii. Why doesn’t the speaker want to be burnt?
c. Which images and metaphors are used in the story? 
d. Summarise the short story “The Wish” in about 200 words.
e. The story shows the events through the eyes of the narrator and the child. 
Comparing the two styles, who presents more interesting or effe ctive view for 
the readers? Why? 
f. Is “The Wish” a story about self-confidence overcoming fear or about greed? 
Give your arguments.
 Reference beyond the text 
a. Do you think our wish can be fulfilled? Why or why not?
b. Why do you think some people might have a frightening nature ? What would 
you suggest to them to overcome it?
c. Write a folktale that you have heard or read.

=== PAGE 227 ===

 English: Grade 11 220
5 Civil Peace
Chinua Achebe
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. Do you think there would be complete peace after the war?
b. If a disaster occurred, what would you save to ensure your “ happy survival”? 
c. If someone stole something from you out of very few possessi ons, how would 
you feel? Would you accept the loss or get angry?
Chinua Achebe  /tʃɪnwɑ: ətʃɛbeɪ/ (1930 -2013) 
was a Nigerian novelist, poet, professor, and 
critic. He studied English, history, and theology at 
University college, the University of Ibadan. His 
first novel Things Fall Apart  (1958) is the most 
widely read book in modern African literature.
His later novels include N o Longer at Ease  (1960), Arrow of God  (1964), A Man 
of the People  (1966), Anthills of the Savannah  (1987), and his last novel There 
Was a Country  was published in 2012. He also published a large number of sho rt 
stories, children's books, and essay collections. Since he was born in the Igbo village 
of Ogidi in south-eastern Nigeria, his novels focus on the traditions of Igbo society. He 
wrote about the cultural and political turmoil of Nigeria, from  colony to postcolony, 
and through civil war and beyond.
The story 'Civil Peace' (1971) is set in the aftermath of the Nigerian Civil War. It i s 
about the effects of the Nigerian Civil War on the people, and the “civil peace” that 
followed. Nigeria became an independent nation from the British  colony in 1960. 
The Nigerian Civil War began in 1967 when the Igbo tried to sep arate from Nigeria 
to form the independent Republic of Biafra. After enduring thre e years of bloody 
battles, the Ibo were forced to surrender in 1970, ending the w ar. Biafrans suffered 
a severe famine due to the effect of war. Nearly a million people died of starvation.
Reading
Jonathan Iwegbu counted himself extra-ordinarily lucky. 'Happy survival!' meant 
so much more to him than just a current fashion of greeting old  friends in the first 


=== PAGE 228 ===

English: Grade 11 221
hazy days of peace. It went deep to his heart. He had come out of the war with five 
inestimable blessings - his head, his wife Maria's head and the  heads of three out of 
their four children. As a bonus he also had his old bicycle - a miracle too but naturally 
not to be compared to the safety of five human heads. 
The bicycle had a little history of its own. One day at the hei ght of the war it was 
commandeered 'for urgent military action'. Hard as its loss wou ld have been to him 
he would still have let it go without a thought had he not had some doubts about the 
genuineness of the officer. It wasn't his disreputable rags, no r the toes peeping out of 
one blue and one brown canvas shoe, nor yet the two stars of his rank done obviously 
in a hurry in biro, that troubled Jonathan; many good and heroi c soldiers looked the 
same or worse. It was rather a certain lack of grip and firmnes s in his manner. So 
Jonathan, suspecting he might be amenable to influence, rummage d in his raffia bag 
and produced the two pounds with which he had been going to buy firewood which his 
wife, Maria, retailed to camp officials for extra stock-fish an d corn meal, and got his 
bicycle back. That night he buried it in the little clearing in the bush where the dead of 
the camp, including his own youngest son, were buried. When he dug it up again a year 
later after the surrender all it needed was a little palm-oil g reasing. 'Nothing puzzles 
God,' he said in wonder.
He put it to immediate use as a taxi and accumulated a small pi le of Biafran money 
ferrying camp officials and their families across the four-mile  stretch to the nearest 
tarred road. His standard charge per trip was six pounds and those who had the money 
were only glad to be rid of some of it in this way. At the end of a fortnight he had made 
a small fortune of one hundred and fifteen pounds.
Then he made the journey to Enugu and found another miracle wai ting for him. It 
was unbelievable. He rubbed his eyes and looked again and it wa s still standing there 
before him. But, needless to say, even that monumental blessing  must be accounted 
also totally inferior to the five heads in the family. This new est miracle was his little 
house in Ogui Overside. Indeed, nothing puzzles God! Only two h ouses away a huge 
concrete edifice some wealthy contractor had put up just before the war was a mountain 
of rubble. And here was Jonathan's little zinc house of no regrets built with mud blocks 
quite intact! Of course the doors and windows were missing and five sheets off the 
roof. 
But what was that? And anyhow he had returned to Enugu early enough to pick up bits 
of old zinc and wood and soggy sheets of cardboard lying around  the neighbourhood 
before thousands more came out of their forest holes looking fo r the same things. 

=== PAGE 229 ===

 English: Grade 11 222
He got a destitute carpenter with one old hammer, a blunt plane  and a few bent and 
rusty nails in his tool bag to turn this assortment of wood, pa per and metal into door 
and window shutters for five Nigerian shillings or fifty Biafra n pounds. He paid the 
pounds, and moved in with his overjoyed family carrying five heads on their shoulders.
His children picked mangoes near the military cemetery and sold  them to soldiers' 
wives for a few pennies - real pennies this time - and his wife started making breakfast 
akara balls for neighbours in a hurry to start life again. With  his family earnings he 
took his bicycle to the villages around and bought fresh palm-w ine which he mixed 
generously in his rooms with the water which had recently started running again in the 
public tap down the road, and opened up a bar for soldiers and other lucky people with 
good money.
At first he went daily, then every other day and finally once a  week, to the offices of 
the Coal Corporation where he used to be a miner, to find out w hat was what. The 
only thing he did find out in the end was that that little house of his was even a greater 
blessing than he had thought. Some of his fellow ex-miners who had nowhere to return 
at the end of the day's waiting just' slept outside the doors o f the offices and cooked 
what meal they could scrounge together in Bournvita tins. As th e weeks lengthened 
and still nobody could say what was what Jonathan discontinued his weekly visits 
altogether and faced his palm-wine bar.
But nothing puzzles God. Came the day of the windfall when after five days of endless 
scuffles in queues and counter-queues in the sun outside the Tr easury he had twenty 
pounds counted into his palms as ex-gratia award for the rebel money he had turned in. 
It was like Christmas for him and for many others like him when the payments began. 
They called it (since few could manage its proper official name) egg-rasher.
As soon as the pound notes were placed in his palm Jonathan simply closed it tight over 
them and buried fist and money inside his trouser pocket. He ha d to be extra careful 
because he had seen a man a couple of days earlier collapse int o near-madness in an 
instant before that oceanic crowd because no sooner had he got his twenty pounds than 
some heartless ruffian picked it off him. Though it was not rig ht that a man in such 
an extremity of agony should be blamed yet many in the queues that day were able to 
remark quietly at the victim's carelessness, especially after he pulled out the innards of 
his pocket and revealed a hole in it big enough to pass a thief's head. But of course he 
had insisted that the money had been in the other pocket, pulling it out too to show its 
comparative wholeness. So one had to be careful.
Jonathan soon transferred the money to his left hand and pocket  so as to leave his 

=== PAGE 230 ===

English: Grade 11 223
right free for shaking hands should the need arise, though by fixing his gaze at such an 
elevation as to miss all approaching human faces he made sure t hat the need did not 
arise, until he got home.
He was normally a heavy sleeper but that night he heard all the neighbourhood noises 
die down one after another. Even the night watchman who knocked the hour on some 
metal somewhere in the distance had fallen silent after knockin g one o'clock'. That 
must have been the last thought in Jonathan's mind before he was finally carried away 
himself. He couldn't have been gone for long, though, when he was violently awakened 
again.
'Who is knocking?' whispered his wife lying beside him on the floor.
'I don't know,' he whispered back breathlessly.
The second time the knocking came it was so loud and imperious that the rickety old 
door could have fallen down.
'Who is knocking?' he asked them, his voice parched and trembling.
'Na tief-man and him people,' came the cool reply. 'Make you hopen de door.' This was 
followed by the heaviest knocking of all.
Maria was the first to raise the alarm, then he followed and all their children.
'Police-o! Thieves-o! Neighbours-o! Police-o! We are lost! We are dead! Neighbours, 
are you asleep? Wake up! Police-o!'
This went on for a long time and then stopped suddenly. Perhaps  they had scared the 
thief away. There was total silence. But only for a short while.
'You done finish?' asked the voice outside. 'Make we help you small. Oya, everybody!'
'Police-o! Tief-man-so! Neighbours-o! we done loss-o! Police- o!...'
There were at least five other voices besides the leader's.
 Jonathan and his family were now completely paralysed by terro r. Maria and the 
children sobbed inaudibly like lost souls. Jonathan groaned continuously.
The silence that followed the thieves' alarm vibrated horribly. Jonathan all but begged 
their leader to speak again and be done with it.
'My frien,' said he at long last, 'we don try our best for call  dem but I think say dem 
all done sleep-o ... So wetin we go do now? Sometaim you wan call soja? Or you wan 
make we call dem for you? Soja better pass police. No be so?'
'Na so!' replied his men. Jonathan thought he heard even more voices now than before 
and groaned heavily. His legs were sagging under him and his throat felt like sandpaper.

=== PAGE 231 ===

 English: Grade 11 224
'My friend, why you no de talk again. I de ask you say you wan make we call soja?'
'No'.
'Awrighto. Now make we talk business. We no be bad fief. We no like for make trouble. 
Trouble done finish. War done finish and all the katakata wey d e for inside. No Civil 
War again. This time na Civil Peace. No be so?'
'Na so!' answered the horrible chorus.
'What do you want from me? I am a poor man. Everything I had we nt with this war. 
Why do you come to me? You know people who have money. We. ..'
'Awright! We know say you no get plenty money. But we sef no ge t even anini. So 
derefore make you open dis window and give us one hundred pound  and we go 
commot. Orderwise we de come for inside now to show you guitar-boy like dis ...'
A volley of automatic fire rang through the sky. Maria and the children began to weep 
aloud again.
'Ah, missisi de cry again. No need for dat. We done talk say we  na good tief. We just 
take our small money and go nwayor- ly. No molest. Abi we de molest?'
'At all!' sang the chorus.
'My friends,' began Jonathan hoarsely. 'I hear what you say and  I thank you. If I had 
one hundred pounds ...'
'Lookia my frien, no be play we come play for your house. If we  make mistake and 
step for inside you no go like am-o. So derefore . . .
'To God who made me; if you come inside and find one hundred po unds, take it and 
shoot me and shoot my wife and children. I swear to God. The on ly money I have in 
this life is this twenty-pounds egg-rasher they gave me today ...'
'Ok. Time de go. Make you open dis window and bring the twenty pound. We go 
manage am like dat.'
There were now loud murmurs of dissent among the chor- us: 'Na lie de man de lie; e 
get plenty money ... Make we go inside and search properly well  ... Wetin be twenty 
pound? ...'
'Shurrup!' rang the leader's voice like a lone shot in the sky and silenced the murmuring 
at once. 'Are you dere? Bring the money quick!'
'I am coming,' said Jonathan fumbling in the darkness with the key of the small wooden 
box he kept by his side on the mat.
At the first sign of light as neighbours and others assembled to commiserate with him 

=== PAGE 232 ===

English: Grade 11 225
he was already strapping his five-gallon demijohn to his bicycl e carrier and his wife, 
sweating in the open fire, was turning over akara balls in a wi de clay bowl of boiling 
oil. In the corner his eldest son was rinsing out dregs of yest erday's palm-wine from 
old beer bottles.
'I count it as nothing,' he told his sympathizers, his eyes on the rope he was tying. 
'What is egg-rasher? Did I depend on it last week? Or is it greater than other things that 
went with the war? I say, let egg-rasher perish in the flames! Let it go where everything 
else has gone. Nothing puzzles God.'
Glossary
akara balls (n.): deep fried balls of ground beans
amenable (adj.): responsive, open
anini (n.): a small Nigerian coin worth less than one cent
Biafran (n.): of the rebellious southeastern region of Nigeria, which declared itself the 
independent Republic of Biafra in the Civil War of 1967
biro (n.): British expression for ‘ballpoint pen’
commandeer (v.): to seize for military use
commiserate (v.): sympathize with or show sorrow for
demijohn (n.): a large bottle with a short neck
destitute (adj.): lacking the basic necessities of life’ poverty-stricken
disreputable (adj.): not respectable; having or deserving a bad reputation
dissent (n.): disagreement; refusal to accept a common opinion
edifice (n.):  a building, especially a large, important-looking one
Enugu (n.):  a city in southeastern Nigeria
fortnight (n.): British English for ‘two weeks’
katakata (n.): (Nigerian English dialect) confusion, trouble
Na tief-man… hopen de door (dialect):  I am a thief of my accomplices. Open the 
door.
raffia bag (n.) : a bag woven from the fibers of the raffia palm tree
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. Why did Jonathan think of himself as 'extraordinarily lucky' ?

=== PAGE 233 ===

 English: Grade 11 226
b. What are the ‘five blessings’ for which Jonathan is grateful ?
c. Why did Jonathan mistrust the officer who wanted to take his  bicycle? What 
does this tell you about the situation in Nigeria?
d. What visitors might be at the door? Are Jonathan and his wif e completely 
surprised? Explain.
e. Why does no one in the neighbourhood respond when the thieve s pound on 
Jonathan’s door? Why do the thieves call for the police?
 Reference to the context 
a. What does Jonathan mean by his expression “Nothing puzzles G od”? What does 
this expression reveal about his character? Explain by citing d etails from the 
story.
b. How does Jonathan change as he experiences the conflicts in his life? Explain.
c. Read the extract and answer the questions below.
“To God who made me; if you come inside and find one hundred pounds, take it 
and shoot me and shoot my wife and children. I swear to God. The only money I 
have in this life is this twenty pounds egg-rasher they gave me today ...”
i. Who is the speaker?
ii. Who is the speaker talking to?
iii. Who does “they” refer to?
d. Nigerian English has words like soja 'soldier' and katakata 'confusion', 'trouble' 
derived apparently from English words but transformed by native  languages' 
phonologies.  What does the author’s use of dialect here add to the story?
e. Why do you think the thieves who come to rob Jonathan speak English with a 
heavier African accent than Jonathan does?
f. The title of the story "Civil Peace" itself is ironical as t here is little to differentiate 
‘civil peace’ from ‘civil war’.  Do you think that the title of this story is appropriate, 
or would “Civil War” have been a better title? Explain.
 Reference beyond the text 
a. How would you describe the civil peace in Nigeria?
b. What kind of attitude towards life do you think you would ha ve if your situation 
was similar to that of Jonathan’s?
c. Draw the character sketch of Jonathan Iwegbu.

=== PAGE 234 ===

English: Grade 11 227
6 Two Little Soldiers
Guy de Maupassant
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. Can there be conflict in love?
b. Is it good to betray a friend?
c. Have you ever read a tragic story or watched a tragic movie?  What happens in 
tragedy?
Guy de Maupassant  (1850-1893) was a popular 19th-
century French writer. His short stories are characterized 
by their economy of style and their efficient effortless 
dénouement. His stories are linked by irony and the 
frailty of human nature. He was an author of the realist 
and naturalist schools of writing. He wrote novels, poetry 
and newspapers articles, but he is best known for his short 
stories in the field of literature.
The story 'Two Little Soldiers' is about a triangular love with a completely unexpected 
twist at the end. This story shows the compatibility of friends hip and romantic love 
with change, discontent, conflict, betrayal and jealousy. 
Reading
Every Sunday, as soon as they were free, the little soldiers would go for a walk. They 
turned to the right on leaving the barracks, crossed Courbevoie  with rapid strides, as 
though on a forced march; then, as the houses grew scarcer, the y slowed down and 
followed the dusty road which leads to Bezons.
They were small and thin, lost in their ill-fitting capes, too large and too long, 
whose sleeves covered their hands; their ample red trousers fel l in folds around their 
ankles. Under the high, stiff shako one could just barely perce ive two thin, hollow-
cheeked Breton faces, with their calm, naïve blue eyes. They never spoke during their 
journey, going straight before them, the same idea in each one's mind taking the place 
of conversation. For at the entrance of the little forest of Champioux they had found a 
spot which reminded them of home, and they did not feel happy anywhere else.


=== PAGE 235 ===

 English: Grade 11 228
At the crossing of the Colombes and Chatou roads, when they arrived under the trees, 
they would take off their heavy, oppressive headgear and wipe their foreheads.
They always stopped for a while on the bridge at Bezons, and looked at the Seine. They 
stood there several minutes, bending over the railing, watching the white sails, which 
perhaps reminded them of their home, and of the fishing smacks leaving for the open.
As soon as they had crossed the Seine, they would purchase prov isions at the 
delicatessen, the baker's, and the wine merchant's. A piece of bologna, four cents' 
worth of bread, and a quart of wine, made up the luncheon which  they carried away, 
wrapped up in their handkerchiefs. But as soon as they were out of the village their gait 
would slacken and they would begin to talk.
Before them was a plain with a few clumps of trees, which led t o the woods, a little 
forest which seemed to remind them of that other forest at Kermarivan. The wheat and 
oat fields bordered on the narrow path, and Jean Kerderen said each time to Luc Le 
Ganidec:
"It's just like home, just like Plounivon."
"Yes, it's just like home."
And they went on, side by side, their minds full of dim memorie s of home. They saw 
the fields, the hedges, the forests, and beaches.
Each time they stopped near a large stone on the edge of the pr ivate estate, because it 
reminded them of the dolmen of Locneuven.
As soon as they reached the first clump of trees, Luc Le Ganidec would cut off a small 
stick, and, whittling it slowly, would walk on, thinking of the folks at home.
Jean Kerderen carried the provisions.
From time to time Luc would mention a name, or allude to some b oyish prank which 
would give them food for plenty of thought. And the home countr y, so dear and so 
distant, would little by little gain possession of their minds, sending them back through 
space, to the well-known forms and noises, to the familiar scenery, with the fragrance 
of its green fields and sea air. They no longer noticed the sme lls of the city. And in 
their dreams they saw their friends leaving, perhaps forever, for the dangerous fishing 
grounds.
They were walking slowly, Luc Le Ganidec and Jean Kerderen, con tented and sad, 
haunted by a sweet sorrow, the slow and penetrating sorrow of a captive animal which 

=== PAGE 236 ===

English: Grade 11 229
remembers the days of its freedom.
And when Luc had finished whittling his stick, they came to a little nook, where every 
Sunday they took their meal. They found the two bricks, which t hey had hidden in a 
hedge, and they made a little fire of dry branches and roasted their sausages on the 
ends of their knives.
When their last crumb of bread had been eaten and the last drop  of wine had been 
drunk, they stretched themselves out on the grass side by side, without speaking, their 
half-closed eyes looking away in the distance, their hands clas ped as in prayer, their 
red-trousered legs mingling with the bright colours of the wild flowers.
Towards noon they glanced, from time to time, towards the village of Bezons, for the 
dairy maid would soon be coming. Every Sunday she would pass in  front of them on 
the way to milk her cow, the only cow in the neighbourhood whic h was sent out to 
pasture.
Soon they would see the girl, coming through the fields, and it pleased them to watch 
the sparkling sunbeams reflected from her shining pail. They never spoke of her. They 
were just glad to see her, without understanding why.
She was a tall, strapping girl, freckled and tanned by the open air - a girl typical of the 
Parisian suburbs.
Once, on noticing that they were always sitting in the same place, she said to them:
"Do you always come here?"
Luc Le Ganidec, more daring than his friend, stammered:
"Yes, we come here for our rest."
That was all. But the following Sunday, on seeing them, she smi led with the kindly 
smile of a woman who understood their shyness, and she asked:
"What are you doing here? Are you watching the grass grow?"
Luc, cheered up, smiled: "P'raps."
She continued: "It's not growing fast, is it?"
He answered, still laughing: "Not exactly."
She went on. But when she came back with her pail full of milk,  she stopped before 
them and said:

=== PAGE 237 ===

 English: Grade 11 230
"Want some? It will remind you of home."
She had, perhaps instinctively, guessed and touched the right spot.
Both were moved. Then not without difficulty, she poured some m ilk into the bottle 
in which they had brought their wine. Luc started to drink, car efully watching lest he 
should take more than his share. Then he passed the bottle to J ean. She stood before 
them, her hands on her hips, her pail at her feet, enjoying the  pleasure that she was 
giving them. Then she went on, saying: "Well, bye-bye until next Sunday!"
For a long time, they watched her tall form as it receded in the distance, blending with 
the background, and finally disappeared.
The following week as they left the barracks, Jean said to Luc:
"Don't you think we ought to buy her something good?"
They were sorely perplexed by the problem of choosing something  to bring to the 
dairy maid. Luc was in favour of bringing her some chitterlings ; but Jean, who had a 
sweet tooth, thought that candy would be the best thing. He won , and so they went to 
a grocery to buy two sous' worth, of red and white candies.
This time they ate more quickly than usual, excited by anticipation.
Jean was the first one to notice her. "There she is," he said; and Luc answered: "Yes, 
there she is."
She smiled when she saw them, and cried:
"Well, how are you today?"
They both answered together:
"All right! How's everything with you?"
Then she started to talk of simple things which might interest them; of the weather, of 
the crops, of her masters.
They didn't dare to offer their candies, which were slowly melt ing in Jean's pocket. 
Finally, Luc, growing bolder, murmured:
"We have brought you something."
She asked: "Let's see it."
Then Jean, blushing to the tips of his ears, reached in his poc ket, and drawing out the 
little paper bag, handed it to her.

=== PAGE 238 ===

English: Grade 11 231
She began to eat the little sweet dainties. The two soldiers sa t in front of her, moved 
and delighted.
At last she went to do her milking, and when she came back she again gave them some 
milk.
They thought of her all through the week and often spoke of her: The following Sunday 
she sat beside them for a longer time.
The three of them sat there, side by side, their eyes looking f ar away in the distance, 
their hands clasped over their knees, and they told each other little incidents and little 
details of the villages where they were born, while the cow, wa iting to be milked, 
stretched her heavy head toward the girl and mooed.
Soon the girl consented to eat with them and to take a sip of w ine. Often she 
brought them plums pocket for plums were now ripe. Her presence  enlivened the 
little Breton soldiers, who chattered away like two birds.
One Tuesday something unusual happened to Luc Le Ganidec; he asked for leave and 
did not return until ten o'clock at night.
Jean, worried and racked his brain to account for his friend's having obtained leave.
The following Friday, Luc borrowed ten cents from one of his friends, and once more 
asked and obtained leave for several hours.
When he started out with Jean on Sunday he seemed queer, distur bed, changed. 
Kerderen did not understand; he vaguely suspected something, but he could not guess 
what it might be.
They went straight to the usual place, and lunched slowly. Neither was hungry.
Soon the girl appeared. They watched her approach as they always did. When she was 
near, Luc arose and went towards her. She placed her pail on th e ground and kissed 
him. She kissed him passionately, throwing her arms around his neck, without paying 
attention to Jean, without even noticing that he was there.
Poor Jean was dazed, so dazed that he could not understand. His  mind was upset and 
his heart broken, without his even realizing why.
Then the girl sat down beside Luc, and they started to chat.
Jean was not looking at them. He understood now why his friend had gone out twice 
during the week. He felt the pain and the sting which treachery and deceit leave in their 

=== PAGE 239 ===

 English: Grade 11 232
wake.
Luc and the girl went together to attend to the cow.
Jean followed them with his eyes. He saw them disappear side by side, the red trousers 
of his friend making a scarlet spot against the white road. It was Luc who sank the 
stake to which the cow was tethered. The girl stooped down to milk the cow, while he 
absent-mindedly stroked the animal's glossy neck. Then they lef t the pail in the grass 
and disappeared in the woods.
Jean could no longer see anything but the wall of leaves throug h which they had 
passed. He was unmanned so that he did not have strength to sta nd. He stayed there, 
motionless, bewildered and grieving-simple, passionate grief. H e wanted to weep, to 
run away, to hide somewhere, never to see anyone again.
Then he saw them coming back again. They were walking slowly, h and in hand, as 
village lovers do. Luc was carrying the pail.
After kissing him again, the girl went on, nodding carelessly to Jean. She did not offer 
him any milk that day.
The two little soldiers sat side by side, motionless as always,  silent and quiet, their 
calm faces in no way betraying the trouble in their hearts. The  sun shone down on 
them. From time to time they could hear the plaintive lowing of the cow. At the usual 
time they arose to return.
Luc was whittling a stick. Jean carried the empty bottle. He left it at the wine merchant's 
in Bezons. Then they stopped on the bridge, as they did every Sunday, and watched the 
water flowing by.
Jean leaned over the railing, farther and farther, as though he had seen something in the 
stream which hypnotized him. Luc said to him:
"What's the matter? Do you want a drink?"
He had hardly said the last word when Jean's head carried away the rest of his body, 
and the little blue and red soldier fell like a shot and disappeared in the water.
Luc, paralyzed with horror, tried vainly to shout for help. In the distance he saw 
something move; then his friend's head bobbed up out of the wat er only to disappear 
again.
Farther down he again noticed a hand, just one hand, which appe ared and again went 
out of sight. That was all.

=== PAGE 240 ===

English: Grade 11 233
The boatmen who had rushed to the scene found the body that day.
Luc ran back to the barracks, crazed, and with eyes and voice f ull of tears, he related 
the accident: "He leaned--he--he was leaning--so far over--that  his head carried him 
away--and--he--fell--he fell----"
Emotion choked him so that he could say no more. If he had only known.
Glossary
gait (n.): a manner of walking or moving on foot
slacken (v.): to reduce or decrease in speed
whittle (v.): to cut, trim, or shape (a stick, piece of wood, etc.) by carving off bits with 
a knife
allude (v.): to mention it in an indirect way
nook (n.): a small sheltered place or recess
instinctively (adv.): without conscious thought
recede (v.): to go or move further away into the distance, or to become less clear
perplexed (adj.): completely baffled; very puzzled
enliven (v.): to make more entertaining, interesting, or cheerful
 Understanding the text 
Answer these questions.
a. Why do the two soldiers spend their free time on Sundays awa y from the barracks 
out in the countryside?
b. Why does the girl become the topic of conversation for these  soldiers?
c. Why does deception enter into their friendship? 
d. Do you think that Luc is a betrayer of friendship?
e. What is the cause of suicide of Jean? Do you think that it w as the only release of 
his love?
 Reference to the context 
a. What is the central theme of the story?
b. "What are you doing here? Are you watching the grass grow?"
i. Who is the speaker?
ii. What does the word “here” indicate?
iii. Who does “you” refer to?

=== PAGE 241 ===

 English: Grade 11 234
c. "He leaned--he--he was leaning--so far over--that his head c arried him away--
and--he--fell--he fell----"
i. Who is the speaker?
ii. Why is the speaker speaking with interruption?
iii. What does he mean when he says “he--fell--he fell---”?
d. Two Little Soldiers can be viewed as a series of dramatic scenes. Describe the 
story as tragedy.
e. What is the setting and style of the story?
f. How would you describe the conflict between the friends?
 Reference beyond the text 
a. Is it good to have conflict between friendship and love? Is it morally good that a 
person and his best friend can love the same person?
b. How would you describe the triangular love?

=== PAGE 242 ===

English: Grade 11 235
7 An Astrologer’s Day
R. K. Narayan
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. Have you ever shown your palm to a fortune teller? 
Do you believe in fortune telling?
b. Why do you think people want to know their futures? 
c. Look at this picture. Can you name each of the zodiac 
signs? What is your zodiac sign?
R. K. Narayan (1906-2001) was an Indian writer known 
for his works set in the fictional South Indian town 
of Malgudi. He was born in Madras, South India. He 
wrote many novels including Swami and Friends, The 
Bachelor of Arts and The English Teacher, along with 
short stories and other works. He was among the best 
known and most widely read Indian novelists who 
wrote in English. He highlighted the social context and 
everyday life of his characters. 
Astrology is a form of fortune telling, originated in ancient B abylonia. It has been 
practised in many cultures, including ancient Rome, Greece, Ind ia, and China. 
'An Astrologer's Day'  is a thriller, suspense story describing a day in the life of 
an astrologer who makes his living by selling cosmic insights t o gullible villagers, 
though he has no knowledge of the cosmos or actual spiritual insight. 
Reading
Punctually at midday he opened his bag and spread out his profe ssional equipment, 
which consisted of a dozen cowrie shells, a square piece of cloth with obscure mystic 
charts on it, a notebook and a bundle of palmyra writing. His forehead was resplendent 
with sacred ash and vermilion, and his eyes sparkled with a sha rp abnormal gleam 
which was really an outcome of a continual searching look for c ustomers, but which 
his simple clients took to be a prophetic light and felt comforted. The power of his eyes 
was considerably enhanced by their position—placed as they were between the painted 


=== PAGE 243 ===

 English: Grade 11 236
forehead and the dark whiskers which streamed down his cheeks: even a half-wit’s 
eyes would sparkle in such a setting. To crown the effect, he wound a saffron-coloured 
turban around his head. This colour scheme never failed. People  were attracted to 
him as bees are attracted to cosmos or dahlia stalks. He sat un der the boughs of a 
spreading tamarind tree which flanked a path running through th e Town Hall Park. It 
was a remarkable place in many ways: a surging crowd was always  moving up and 
down this narrow road morning till night. A variety of trades a nd occupations was 
represented all along its way: medicine-sellers, sellers of sto len hardware and junk, 
magicians and, above all, an auctioneer of cheap cloth, who cre ated enough din all 
day to attract the whole town. Next to him in vociferousness ca me a vendor of fried 
groundnuts, who gave his ware a fancy name each day, calling it  Bombay Ice-Cream 
one day, and on the next Delhi Almond, and on the third Raja’s Delicacy, and so on and 
so forth, and people flocked to him. A considerable portion of this crowd dallied before 
the astrologer too. The astrologer transacted his business by t he light of a flare which 
crackled and smoked up above the groundnut heap nearby. Half th e enchantment of 
the place was due to the fact that it did not have the benefit of municipal lighting. The 
place was lit up by shop lights. One or two had hissing gasligh ts, some had naked 
flares stuck on poles, some were lit up by old cycle lamps and one or two, like the 
astrologer’s, managed without lights of their own. It was a bew ildering crisscross of 
light rays and moving shadows. This suited the astrologer very well, for the simple 
reason that he had not in the least intended to be an astrologer when he began life; and 
he knew no more of what was going to happen to others than he knew what was going 
to happen to himself next minute. He was as much a stranger to the stars as were his 
innocent customers. Yet he said things which pleased and astoni shed everyone: that 
was more a matter of study, practice and shrewd guesswork. All the same, it was as 
much an honest man’s labour as any other, and he deserved the wages he carried home 
at the end of a day.
He had left his village without any previous thought or plan. If he had continued there 
he would have carried on the work of his forefathers—namely, tilling the land, living, 
marrying and ripening in his cornfield and ancestral home. But that was not to be. He 
had to leave home without telling anyone, and he could not rest  till he left it behind a 
couple of hundred miles. To a villager it is a great deal, as if an ocean flowed between.
He had a working analysis of mankind’s troubles: marriage, mone y and the tangles 
of human ties. Long practice had sharpened his perception. With in five minutes he 
understood what was wrong. He charged three pies per question and never opened his 

=== PAGE 244 ===

English: Grade 11 237
mouth till the other had spoken for at least ten minutes, which  provided him enough 
stuff for a dozen answers and advices. When he told the person before him, gazing at 
his palm, ‘In many ways you are not getting the fullest results  for your efforts,’ nine 
out of ten were disposed to agree with him. Or he questioned: ‘Is there any woman in 
your family, maybe even a distant relative, who is not well disposed towards you?’ Or 
he gave an analysis of character: ‘Most of your troubles are du e to your nature. How 
can you be otherwise with Saturn where he is? You have an impet uous nature and a 
rough exterior.’ This endeared him to their hearts immediately, for even the mildest of 
us loves to think that he has a forbidding exterior.
The nuts-vendor blew out his flare and rose to go home. This wa s a signal for the 
astrologer to bundle up too, since it left him in darkness exce pt for a little shaft of 
green light which strayed in from somewhere and touched the ground before him. He 
picked up his cowrie shells and paraphernalia and was putting them back into his bag 
when the green shaft of light was blotted out; he looked up and  saw a man standing 
before him. He sensed a possible client and said: ‘You look so careworn. It will do you 
good to sit down for a while and chat with me.’ The other grumbled some vague reply. 
The astrologer pressed his invitation; whereupon the other thru st his palm under his 
nose, saying: ‘You call yourself an astrologer?’ The astrologer felt challenged and said, 
tilting the other’s palm towards the green shaft of light: ‘Yours is a nature . . .’ ‘Oh, stop 
that,’ the other said. ‘Tell me something worthwhile . . .’
Our friend felt piqued. ‘I charge only three pies per question,  and what you get ought 
to be good enough for your money . . .’ At this the other withdrew his arm, took out an 
anna and flung it out to him, saying, ‘I have some questions to  ask. If I prove you are 
bluffing, you must return that anna to me with interest.’
‘If you find my answers satisfactory, will you give me five rupees?’ ‘No.’ ‘Or will you 
give me eight annas?’
‘All right, provided you give me twice as much if you are wrong ,’ said the stranger. 
This pact was accepted after a little further argument. The ast rologer sent up a prayer 
to heaven as the other lit a cheroot. The astrologer caught a glimpse of his face by the 
match-light. There was a pause as cars hooted on the road, jutka-drivers swore at their 
horses and the babble of the crowd agitated the semi-darkness o f the park. The other 
sat down, sucking his cheroot, puffing out, sat there ruthlessly. The astrologer felt very 
uncomfortable. ‘Here, take your anna back. I am not used to such challenges. It is late 
for me today . . .’ He made preparations to bundle up. The other held his wrist and said, 

=== PAGE 245 ===

 English: Grade 11 238
‘You can’t get out of it now. You dragged me in while I was pas sing.’ The astrologer 
shivered in his grip; and his voice shook and became faint. ‘Le ave me today. I will 
speak to you tomorrow.’ The other thrust his palm in his face a nd said, ‘Challenge 
is challenge. Go on.’ The astrologer proceeded with his throat drying up. ‘There is a 
woman . . .’
‘Stop,’ said the other. ‘I don’t want all that. Shall I succeed in my present search or not? 
Answer this and go. Otherwise I will not let you go till you di sgorge all your coins.’ 
The astrologer muttered a few incantations and replied, ‘All ri ght. I will speak. But 
will you give me a rupee if what I say is convincing? Otherwise  I will not open my 
mouth, and you may do what you like.’ After a good deal of haggling the other agreed. 
The astrologer said, ‘You were left for dead. Am I right?’
‘Ah, tell me more.’ ‘A knife has passed through you once?’ said  the astrologer.
‘Good fellow!’ He bared his chest to show the scar. ‘What else?’ ‘And then you were 
pushed into a well nearby in the field. You were left for dead. ’ ‘I should have been 
dead if some passer-by had not chanced to peep into the well,’ exclaimed the other, 
overwhelmed by enthusiasm. ‘When shall I get at him?’ he asked, clenching his fist.
‘In the next world,’ answered the astrologer. ‘He died four months ago in a far-off town. You 
will never see any more of him.’ The other groaned on hearing it. The astrologer proceeded.
‘Guru Nayak—’ ‘You know my name!’ the other said, taken aback.
‘As I know all other things. Guru Nayak, listen carefully to wh at I have to say. Your 
village is two days’ journey due north of this town. Take the next train and be gone. I 
see once again great danger to your life if you go from home.’ He took out a pinch of 
sacred ash and held it out to him. ‘Rub it on your forehead and go home. Never travel 
southward again, and you will live to be a hundred.’
‘Why should I leave home again?’ the other said reflectively. ‘I was only going away 
now and then to look for him and to choke out his life if I met him.’ He shook his head 
regretfully. ‘He has escaped my hands. I hope at least he died as he deserved.’ ‘Yes,’ 
said the astrologer. ‘He was crushed under a lorry.’ The other looked gratified to hear 
it.
The place was deserted by the time the astrologer picked up his  articles and put them 
into his bag. The green shaft was also gone, leaving the place in darkness and silence. 
The stranger had gone off into the night, after giving the astrologer a handful of coins.

=== PAGE 246 ===

English: Grade 11 239
It was nearly midnight when the astrologer reached home. His wi fe was waiting for 
him at the door and demanded an explanation. He flung the coins  at her and said, 
‘Count them. One man gave all that.’
‘Twelve and a half annas,’ she said, counting. She was overjoye d. ‘I can buy some 
jaggery and coconut tomorrow. The child has been asking for sweets for so many days 
now. I will prepare some nice stuff for her.’
‘The swine has cheated me! He promised me a rupee,’ said the astrologer. She looked 
up at him. ‘You look worried. What is wrong?’ ‘Nothing.’
After dinner, sitting on the pyol, he told her, ‘Do you know a great load is gone from 
me today? I thought I had the blood of a man on my hands all th ese years. That was 
the reason why I ran away from home, settled here and married y ou. He is alive.’
She gasped. ‘You tried to kill!’
‘Yes, in our village, when I was a silly youngster. We drank, g ambled and quarrelled 
badly one day—why think of it now? Time to sleep,’ he said, yaw ning, and stretched 
himself on the pyol.
Glossary
cheroot (n.): a cigar cut square at both ends
jutka (n.): a two-wheeled, horse-drawn vehicle
disgorge (v.): to give up or hand over
cowrie (n.): a small snail commonly found in warm, shallow waters of the Pacific and 
Indian Oceans
impetuous (adj.): done quickly without thought; hasty
incantation (n.):  words spoken in a magic spell or charm
jaggery (n.):  solid dark brown sugar made from sugarcane
pyol (n.): a low bench
palmyra (n.): paper made from the leaves of the palmyra tree
paraphernalia (n.):  things used in a particular activity; equipment
piqued (adj.): aroused in anger or resentment; offended
saffron (n.): an orange-yellow colour
vociferousness (n.): noisy outcrying

=== PAGE 247 ===

 English: Grade 11 240
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. How does the astrologer’s  appearance help him attract customers? How does he 
help the customers satisfy their needs?
b. How do you characterise the astrologer’s attitude toward the  stranger?
c. What details does the astrologer give the stranger about his  past? 
d. Why does he advise the stranger to go home immediately?
e. What is your reaction to the conversation between the astrol oger and his wife?
 Reference to the context 
a. Suspense is the feeling of anticipation you may have as you read. In this story, 
what details contributed to your feelings of suspense and surprise? Explain.
b. Analyze the conflicts in “An Astrologer’s Day.” Explain how the conflicts are 
resolved and what they reveal about the characters involved in the story.
c. “All right. I will speak. But will you give me a rupee if wh at I say is convincing? 
Otherwise I will not open my mouth, and you may do what you like.”
i. Who is the speaker?
ii. Who is he speaking to?
iii. What does the expression ‘open my mouth’ mean?
d. Description helps readers visualize what is happening in a s tory. What details 
and techniques does the author use to describe the astrologer?
e. Irony is a contrast between appearances and reality. What is  ironic about Guru 
Nayak’s meeting with the astrologer?
f. How does the astrologer’s manner of dress suit his character ?
 Reference beyond the text 
a. The astrologer attracts many customers in the street who are  pleased and 
astonished by what he tells them. What does this tell you about the people of the 
town walking in the street?
b. Why do most people want to know their future? Do you think a strologers can 
really help them know their future?
c. Is astrology a good practice of fortune telling or is it jus t a blind faith? Give 
reasons.

=== PAGE 248 ===

English: Grade 11 241
Unit 2 Poems
1 Corona Says
Vishnu S. Rai
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. What is pandemic? Describe a pandemic that you have heard ab out in the history.
b. Is Corona Virus a pandemic? How?
c. Do you think that human behaviour is responsible for the pan demic?
Vishnu S Rai (1951-) was educated in India, Nepal, and the 
UK. He taught English at Tribhuvan University for three 
decades and retired as Professor of English Language 
Education. Rai writes both in English and Nepali. He 
has written stories Martyrs & Other Stories  (English), 
play Realities (English), travelogues Nau Dandapari (Nepali), 
and a novel Paheli (Nepali).
But above all he is a poet and he has published Sudama (a semi epic in Nepali), Jeevan (a 
collection of poems in Nepali), Vagabond Verses (a collection of poems in English), 
and Tritiyaki joon (a collection of songs and gazals in Nepali, and his English poems 
are taught in Nepal and abroad. Rai is known as a poet of human emotions.
The poem, Corona Says, written on the theme of the present world crisis Corona and 
its devastating impact on human life, is a subtle satire on man's conduct and attitude. 
It views Covid 19 as the byproduct of man's treatment to nature.
Reading
 Stop crying,
 Oh man,
 Stop cursing me
 And listen.
 I didn’t come here
 of my own free will.


=== PAGE 249 ===

 English: Grade 11 242
 I was invited.
 Believe me,
 I had no choice 
 but to visit you. 
 How many lives were lost 
 Because of me?
 You count.
 But have you ever counted 
 How many have died so far
 Because of you and your wars?
 You call yourself
 ‘the crown of creation’.
 What about the others,
 Those who fly in the sky,
 Those who live in the ocean,
 Those who crawl on the earth,
 And those, the sources of your oxygen? 
 You think they all are your slaves
 Who you can sell or kill
 At your will.
 Don’t blame me.
 I just wanted to show you
 How clean the blue sky looks
 Without dust and smoke.
 I wanted you to realise
 How caged animals feel 
 In a zoo.
 I came


=== PAGE 250 ===

English: Grade 11 243
 Not to give you a test.
 I came
 So that mother Earth
 Could have a little rest.
 You claim that you know everything.
 I just wanted you to know yourself
 The earth is not your property alone -
 It’s as much ours as yours.
 Sure, 
 I will depart one day.
 But remember
 There’re many others like me.
 They’ll come too.
 If you don’t get rid of your inflated ego,
 You’ll be back to your cave time
 That you endured 
 Long, l  o  n  g,   l   o   n   g  ago …
Glossary
cursing (v.): uttering offensive words in anger
crown (n.): authority
slaves (n.): people who are legal property of another and is forced to obey them
ego (n.): a person's sense of self importance
endured (v.): went through
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. Who is the speaker in the poem?
b. Who claim that they are superior to all?

=== PAGE 251 ===

 English: Grade 11 244
c. Why has the speaker come to the Earth?
d. What positive changes have occurred on Earth after the speak er's visit?
 Reference to the context 
a. What does the speaker mean when he says:
But have you ever counted
How many have died so far 
Because of you and your wars?
b. Explain the following:
I will depart one day.
But remember
There’re many others like me.
They’ll come too.
If you don’t get rid of your inflated ego,
You’ll be back to your cave time
That you endured 
Long, l  o  n  g,   l   o   n   g  ago …
c. What does the speaker mean in the following lines? Explain.
The earth is not your property alone -
It’s as much ours as yours.
  Reference beyond the text  
a. What human behaviours are responsible for the suffering in p eople's lives?
b. How does an epidemic differ from pandemic? Briefly explain t he impact of 
Corona Virus on human life and environment.

=== PAGE 252 ===

English: Grade 11 245
2 A Red, Red Rose
Robert Burns
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. How do people express love?
b. What is the symbolic meaning of ‘rose’?
c. What images in nature would you use to express love?
Robert Burns  (1759-1796) was 
a Scottish poet and lyricist. He is 
considered the national poet of 
Scotland and a central figure in 
Scottish literature. His father was 
a tenant farmer, and Burns worked 
as a plowboy. He grew up poor but 
well-read and began writing poetry 
in Scottish dialect. As an adult, he 
was as unsuccessful as his father in 
making a living at farming. 
In 1791, however, he quit farming for good and moved his family  to the nearby 
town of Dumfries. Never in good health, on the morning of July 21, 1796, he died in 
Dumfries at the age of 37. He is best known as a pioneer of the Romantic Movement 
for his lyrical poetry. 
The poem 'A Red, Red Rose'  is a lyrical ballad that describes the speaker’s deep 
love for his beloved and promises that this love will last longer than human life. The 
beloved of the speaker is as beautiful as the red rose and as sweet as the music. With 
the help of the literary devices, the poet has sketched a very vivid and realistic picture 
of his profound love.
Reading
O, my love is like a red, red rose,
That’s newly sprung in June.
O, my love is like the melody,
That’s sweetly play’d in tune.


=== PAGE 253 ===

 English: Grade 11 246
As fair art thou, my bonny lass,
So deep in love am I,
And I will love thee still, my dear,
Till a’ the seas gang dry.
Till a’ the seas gang dry, my dear,
And the rocks melt wi’ the sun!
And I will love thee still, my dear,
While the sands o’ life shall run.
And fare thee weel, my only love,
And fare thee weel a while!
And I will come again, my love,
Tho’ it were ten thousand mile!
Glossary
a’(det.): short form of the word ‘all’
art (v.): an older form of the word ‘are’
bonny (adj.): attractive, beautiful 
gang (v.): ‘go’ in Scottish
lass (n.): a girl or young woman
o’ (prep.): short form of the word ‘of’
weel (adj.): an older form of the word ‘well’
thee (pro.): an older form of the word ‘you’
tho’ (conj.): though
thou (pro.): an older form of the word ‘you’
wi’ (prep.): short form of the word ‘with’
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. To which two things does the speaker compare his love in the  first stanza?
b. What does the speaker promise in the second and third stanza s? 


=== PAGE 254 ===

English: Grade 11 247
c. What imagery does he use in his promise, and why do you thin k he uses such 
language?
d. In the last stanza, what event is about to happen by mention ing the number of 
miles?
e. Which image in the poem do you find the most memorable or su rprising and 
why?
 Reference to the context 
a. What can you infer about the speaker’s devotion to his belov ed from the following 
lines?
And I will come again, my love,
Tho’ it were ten thousand mile!
b. What is the theme of the poem?
c. Paraphrase the whole poem into simple prose form.
d. Literary devices are tools that enable the writers to presen t their ideas, emotions, 
and feelings and also help the readers understand those more profound meanings. 
Analyse the poem in terms of the literary devices such as simil e, symbolism, 
imagery, alliteration, and assonance.
e. What is hyperbole? Explain its purpose citing examples of hy perbole used in the 
poem.
f. What is refrain? Why is it used in the poem? Explain citing an example from the 
poem.
 Reference beyond the text 
a. What kind of love is expressed in "A Red, Red Rose"?
b. Do you think that love has power? Why do the poets compose p oems addressing 
their beloved?
c. Poetry is the expression of feeling and emotions. Explain.

=== PAGE 255 ===

 English: Grade 11 248
3 All the World's a Stage
William Shakespeare
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. How does life begin?
b. Do you think that the whole world is a stage?
c. Are we the actors in the world? What roles can a person play  in his/her life?
William Shakespeare (1564-1616) was an English 
poet, dramatist and actor of the Renaissance era. He 
is widely regarded as the greatest writer in English 
language and the world's greatest dramatist. His 
most famous works include Hamlet, Othello, King 
Lear, Romeo and Juliet and Macbeth. 
This poem is taken from William Shakespeare's play 
As You Like It . With these words “all the world’s 
a stage”  begins the monologue by the character 
Melancholy Jaques in Act II Scene VI of the play.
In this poem, Shakespeare has compared life with a stage. The s even stages of a 
person’s life are infant, school going boy, lover/husband, sold ier/fighter, justice/
ability to understand the right and wrong, Pantalone (greedines s and high in status) 
and old-age., which can come into your mind when you go through  this poem with 
the theme that a person is the ultimate loser in the game of life.
Reading
All the world's a stage,
And all the men and women merely players;
They have their exits and their entrances,
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages. At first, the infant,
Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.
Then the whining schoolboy, with his satchel
And shining morning face, creeping like snail


=== PAGE 256 ===

English: Grade 11 249
Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier,
Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,
Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
Seeking the bubble reputation
Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice,
In fair round belly with good capon lined,
With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws and modern instances;
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slippered pantaloon,
With spectacles on nose and pouch on side;
His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide
For his shrunk shank, and his big manly voice,
Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.
Glossary
furnace (n.): a device for heating
hose (n.): tights, thin trousers that men wore in Shakespeare's time
mewling (v.): crying weakly with a soft, high-pitched sound
oaths (n.): promises
oblivion (n.): a state of nothingness
pard (n.): a leopard
puking (v.): vomiting
sans (prep.): without, lacking
satchel (n.): a shoulder bag for school
treble (adj.): high-pitched


=== PAGE 257 ===

 English: Grade 11 250
whining (v.): uttering a high-pitched cry
woeful (adj.): sorrowful; distressed with grief
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. Why does the poet compare the world with a stage?
b. What is the first stage in a human’s life? In what sense can it be a troubling stage?
c. Describe the second stage of life based on the poem.
d. Why is the last stage called second childhood?
e. In what sense are we the players in the world stage?
 Reference to the context 
a. Explain the following lines:
All the world's a stage,
And all the men and women merely players
b. Explain the following lines briefly with reference to the co ntext.
They have their exits and their entrances;
And one man in his time plays many parts,
c. Read the given lines and answer the questions that follow.
Then the whining schoolboy, with his satchel
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school.
i. Which stage of life is being referred to here by the poet?
ii. Which figure of speech has been employed in the second line ?
iii. Who is compared to the snail?
iv. Does the boy go to the school willingly?
d. Simile and metaphor are the two major poetic devices used in  this poem. Explain 
citing examples of each.
e. Which style does the poet use to express his emotions about how he thinks that 
the world is a stage and all the people living in it are mere players? 
f. What is the theme of this poem?
 Reference beyond the text 
a. Describe the various stages of a human’s life picturised in the poem “All the 
World’s a Stage.”
b. Is Shakespeare’s comparison of human’s life with a drama sta ge apt? How?

=== PAGE 258 ===

English: Grade 11 251
4 Who are you, little i?
E. E. Cummings
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. Have you ever looked out through a window and taken pleasure  in what you 
saw? If so, what did you look at?
b. Which beautiful scenes do you think would make you want to l ook out through 
the window?
c. Do you write the pronoun ‘I’ capital or small in writing?
E(dward) E(stlin) Cummings  (1894-1962), often 
styled as e e cummings, was an American poet, 
painter, essayist, novelist, and playwright. He wrote 
approximately 2,900 poems, two autobiographical 
novels, four plays, and several essays, as well as 
numerous drawings and paintings.
He developed the style of poetry writing for which he became re nowned, with its 
unconventional use of capitalization, punctuation, spacing, and  structure. He is 
regarded as an eminent voice of the 20
th century English literature.
Cummings’ poem 'who are you, little i' describes a child looking out a window at the 
end of the day. It is about nature and the effect it has on the  speaker. The speaker of 
the poem is the person “voicing” the words, recalling a childho od moment closely 
connected with nature. Perhaps the speaker is Cummings.
Reading
who are you, little i
(five or six years old)
peering from some high
window; at the gold
of November sunset
(and feeling: that if day
has to become night


=== PAGE 259 ===

 English: Grade 11 252
this is a beautiful way)
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. Who can be the speaker of this poem?
b. What is “little i” doing?
c. What can be the relationship between “little i” and the spea ker of the poem?
d. What is the speaker remembering from his childhood days in t he poem? 
e. What attitude does the speaker seem to have toward the child  in the poem? 
 Reference to the context 
a. Why do you think Cummings has placed a semicolon between the  words window 
and at?
b. If the speaker is the child grown up, why does he ask, “who are you”?
c. In this poem, an adult reflects on the childhood experience.  Based on that, what 
might be the theme of the lines: “(and feeling: that if day / has to become night / 
this is a beautiful way)”?
d. What is the rhyme scheme used in the poem?
e. Explain the pun in “little i” that is related to what he is doing.
f. How does Cummings’s use of lowercase letters affect your und erstanding of the 
poem? Explain.
 Reference beyond the text 
a. How does nature inspire the speaker in “who are you, little i”? Explain.
b. Recall a childhood moment when you felt closely connected wi th nature. 
Describe the time and place as well as your feelings and thoughts about it.
c. Interpret the poem in any way you like.

=== PAGE 260 ===

English: Grade 11 253
5 The Gift in Wartime
Tran Mong Tu (translated by Vann Phan)
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. Have you ever experienced the death of someone close to you?  If yes, how did 
you feel?
b. Is war always destructive?
c. Using a cause-and-effect chart like the one given here, desc ribe the immediate 
effects that person’s death had on you and others.
Cause
Effect EffectEffect Effect Effect
Tran Mong Tu was born and grown up in Hai 
Dong, North Vietnam in 1943. She worked 
for Associated Press in South Vietnam in the 
1960s.  She moved to the US in 1975 after 
South Vietnam fall. Tran had wanted to be 
a writer since elementary school, but her 
poetry was not published until she reached 
the United States.
Today, she frequently contributes poems and short stories to Vi etnamese literary 
publications in the US and other countries. “War is a terrible thing,” says Tran, who 
has first-hand experience of the Vietnam War (1954-1975). According to Tran, “The 
Vietnam War is a shameful experience, for both Vietnamese and Americans.” Many 
people in both countries felt the terrible tragedy of the war. Losses in the war were 
heavy; more than two million Vietnamese and 57,000 Americans died.
In the poem 'The Gift in Wartime', Tran addresses an absent person. For example, as 
she says, “I offer you roses,” the person to whom she is speaki ng is not present and 
can neither hear nor understand what she is saying.


=== PAGE 261 ===

 English: Grade 11 254
Reading
I offer you roses
Buried in your new grave
I offer you my wedding gown
To cover your tomb still green with grass.
You give me medals
Together with silver stars
And the yellow pips on your badge
Unused and still shining.
I offer you my youth
The days we were still in love
My youth died away
When they told me the bad news.
You give me the smell of blood
From your war dress
Your blood and your enemy’s
So that I may be moved.
I offer you clouds
That linger on my eyes on summer days
I offer you cold winters
Amid my springtime of life.
You give me your lips with no smile
You give me your arms without tenderness
You give me your eyes with no sight
And your motionless body.
Seriously, I apologize to you
I promise to meet you in our next life
I will hold this shrapnel as a token
By which we will recognize each other.

=== PAGE 262 ===

English: Grade 11 255
Glossary
pips (n.): military badges of rank worn on the shoulder
shrapnel (n.): fragments scattered from exploding bombs
tenderness (n.): a feeling of concern, gentle affection or warmth
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. Who is the speaker addressing and why can that person not he ar or understand 
what she is saying?
b. What can you infer about the speaker’s feelings for the pers on addressed as 
“you”?
c. What is the speaker’s attitude toward war?
d. In what ways do you think this person’s fate has affected th e speaker?
e. What does the speaker promise at the end of the poem? Why do  you think the 
speaker does this?
 Reference to the context 
a. What is the theme of the poem?
b. What imagery from the poem made the greatest impression on y ou? Why?
c. Which figurative language is used in the poem? Explain with examples.
d. What does the speaker “offer” in this poem? What does the pe rson addressed as 
“you” give in return?
e. An apostrophe is a literary device in which a writer or spea ker addresses an 
absent person or an abstract idea in such a way as if it were p resent and can 
understand. Discuss the poem in relation to apostrophe.
 Reference beyond the text 
a. One way to get relief from grief is to write or talk about i t. In your opinion, 
how might the speaker in this poem have benefitted from saying what she did? 
Explain.
b. Write an essay on the effects of war.

=== PAGE 263 ===

 English: Grade 11 256
Unit 3 Essays
1 Sharing Tradition
Frank LaPena
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. Do you share your cultural traditions with your friends?
b. Did your parents tell you stories when you were a child? If yes, did they have 
anything to do with your culture or values? 
c. Should we preserve our cultural values and traditions? Why?
Frank LaPena  (1937-2019) was born in San 
Francisco, California. He attended federal Indian 
boarding school in Stewart, Nevada. He received 
his Bachelor of Arts degree from Chico State in 
1965 and a Master of Arts in Anthropology at Sac 
State in 1978. He lectured widely on American 
Indian traditional and cultural issues, emphasizing 
California traditions.
He was a professor of art and former director of Native America n Studies at 
California State University, Sacramento. His paintings, sculptu re, and poetry reflect 
a deep understanding and love of his native heritage. He was a founding member 
of the Maidu Dancers and Traditionalists, dedicated to the revi val and preservation 
of Native arts. He also published several volumes of poetry and  wrote a report 
on contemporary California art activities for News from Native California. He 
was quite interested in the arts and traditions of Native Ameri cans. He coedited 
Legends of Yosemite Miwok  (1992) with Craig D. Bates and wrote Dream Songs 
and Ceremony: Reflections on Traditional California Indian Dance  (2004).
The essay 'Sharing Tradition' is about passing on culture and values from generation 
to generation through oral tradition.  For this, we must listen to our elders’ stories.
Reading
I was thinking one day about recent deaths of some of the tradi tional people and how 


=== PAGE 264 ===

English: Grade 11 257
difficult it is to maintain tradition. I was also thinking how important oral tradition is 
in helping maintain the values of culture, and how in a sense oral tradition is also an art 
form. As the elders pass on, the young people fill their places . Even though we know 
no one lives forever, no one dies if what they have gained by living is carried forward 
by those who follow—if we as individuals assume the responsibilities. This is easy to 
talk and write about, but it is hard to practise.
Not everyone is capable of fulfilling the roles of the elders. On one hand, everyone who 
lives long enough automatically becomes an elder—it is something that just happens. 
Yet some elders have enhanced their lives by creating a special “niche,” and once they 
have passed on, that niche is hard to fill. Religious obligatio ns for the ceremonies 
and dance, for example, were reflected in their knowledge and i n how those elders 
lived and how they affected people around them in common everyd ay activities as 
well. In fact, after the elders passed away, their knowledge of  the culture and the 
responsibilities they had in their community had to be assumed by several individuals.
Because longevity is the guarantor of becoming an elder, the young don’t pay too much 
attention to something that will happen some years down the roa d, but they regret it 
later. I have talked to individuals who were seventy years old or older, and even those 
forty and fifty years old, and they all expressed the feeling t hat they wished they had 
listened more, remembered more, or asked more about the things that the elders were 
willing to share with them.
The separation that exists between generations will always be with us. Each generation 
is faced with new technologies which replace the old; ever-growing populations make 
necessary new developments that replace fertile land with housi ng and impact on the 
natural resources of air and water. Part of tradition is tied t o a natural world which 
is being destroyed. If we are not worried about the apocalypse,  getting killed in the 
streets, or having the drug culture undercut our lives, we migh t wonder what kind of 
world it will be in the future. It is hard to live with all the  stress, worry, and change 
that modern technology imposes on people. It is hard to maintai n traditions in such 
circumstances. Our world is not the world of our great-grandparents.
So we have to remind ourselves that there are things that trans cend generations, and 
the living force of that truth is carried by the person-to-pers on confidentiality of oral 
tradition. A lot depends upon the transmission of information f rom one person to 
another. Oral tradition is the educational tool of understanding the natural world.
Oral tradition is not, however, the way many people in modern society learn things. The 

=== PAGE 265 ===

 English: Grade 11 258
educational process of getting degrees to show how educated we are forces people to 
do things out of necessity and not necessarily out of interest, passion for the true story, 
or because it is good for the community. Sometimes modern resea rchers gathering 
what they think is “oral” material “in the field” are not alway s told the truth. I can 
still see the smile of my friend who used to tell people “whatever they wanted to hear. 
I let them figure it out later,” he said. Or a person doesn’t u nderstand what has been 
told, so he/she corrects it by modifying the material so it mak es sense. The result is 
that erroneous information is published and falsely validates o ne’s research. With the 
printed word there is a tendency to place the author as “someon e who knows” what’s 
going on. As “experts,” writers and lecturers may be put into a  position where they 
think they must have an answer, so they answer by making something up. We need to 
learn to say we don’t know the answer, and direct the question to someone who might 
know. We need to learn from the elders who sometimes say “I’ll sleep on it,” or who 
approach a problem by having everybody’s input come up with an answer—which 
can be changed. Logistically, it is harder to correct errors in  a book if it is already 
published.
A living oral tradition, as opposed to a literary tradition, ac commodates corrections, 
because the stories are “known” by the listeners—although today  a story could be 
someone’s fantasy and it might be harder to validate. The source of one’s information 
and how it was given affects how correct it is. Only if one is patient and gains 
information over a long period of time is it possible to get a proper understanding of 
one’s information. If a person is one of the groups (an insider), usually the information 
is given correctly, because it relates to something the speaker and listener have a vested 
interest in or participate in. It is their life. It is worth doing right.
For an artist, the oral tradition has an impact on how one visu alizes the stories, the 
characters, the designs and colour for art, the atmosphere, and other information which 
can be useful to an artist. If I think of these elders whom I r espect and love and who 
were my teachers, I sometimes wonder—as I extend and alter the traditions—if I am 
somehow not doing right by them. If an artist’s work is abstract, is it true to the stories? 
At what time of doing one’s art does the artist begin to relate  conceptually instead of 
representationally to his source, and is that good or bad? Ultimately being good or bad 
can refer to how we do our art—what’s included or left out, and how true the artwork 
is to the “real” Native American thing. Do our modern life and new things function 
independently of or holistically with the old ways and symbols? Each of us has choices 
in the outcome of our lives.

=== PAGE 266 ===

English: Grade 11 259
As an artist, I won’t try to answer these questions because the answers will be reflected 
in artists’ works, and how they explain their work and how they understand their work. 
Each of us makes choices in how we work and how we live. If one  knows tradition 
and modifies how he/she presents it, I hope it is not only for one’s ego but that more 
independently we are also paying attention to the source of our inspiration. And if it is 
tradition, I hope that we honour the elders and think of the responsibility they entrusted 
to us by sharing the traditions with us.
Glossary
alter (v.): change
apocalypse (n.): a very serious event resulting in great destruction and change
confidentiality (n.): the state of keeping or being kept secret or private
entrust (v.): give responsibility for
erroneous (adj.): wrong; incorrect
holistically (adv.): relating to or concerned with wholes or with complete systems
logistically (adv.): something done in logical or practical way
longevity (n.): long life
niche (n.): ideal position; slot
obligation (n.): responsibility, compulsion
transcend (v.): rise above or go beyond the limits of something
validate (v.): check or prove the validity or accuracy of something
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. According to LaPena, what is the importance of the oral trad ition? To what extent 
do you agree with his opinions and why?
b. Who preserve and pass on the oral tradition? 
c. What is the danger of not passing on information from genera tion to generation? 
d. What is the difference between oral tradition and literary t radition?
e. How does LaPena establish a relationship between art and the  oral tradition?
 Reference the context 
a. LaPena states that the oral tradition helps maintain the val ues of a culture. If you 
believe that the oral tradition is important, how would you maintain it?

=== PAGE 267 ===

 English: Grade 11 260
b. “Not everyone is capable of fulfilling the roles of the elde rs.” Explain this 
statement with reference to the essay.
c. What is the controlling idea or thesis of this essay?
d. How do topic sentences guide the reader through the essay? What would be lost 
without them?
e. What are the four major problems developed by LaPena with re gard to 
maintaining the oral tradition. How are they used to structure the essay?
 Reference beyond the text 
a. Write a paragraph or two explaining your attitude toward the  oral tradition of 
passing along information.
b. Our culture is our identity. Write a few paragraphs explaini ng how you intend to 
preserve your culture, values and norms.

=== PAGE 268 ===

English: Grade 11 261
2 How to Live Before You Die
Steve Jobs
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. What do you know about Steve Jobs’ family and economic backg round?
b. Steve Jobs was a very successful man. What makes a person su ccessful in your 
view? 
c. Steve Jobs had many doubts on how he wanted to lead his life . Do you have the 
same problem?
Steven Jobs  (1955-2011) was an American business 
magnate, industrial designer, investor, and media 
proprietor. He was the chairperson, chief executive 
officer (CEO), and co-founder of Apple Inc. and one 
of the pioneers of microcomputer technology. He was 
named the most powerful person in business by Fortune 
magazine in 2007.
The then CEO of Apple Computer, Steve Jobs’ speech 'How to Live Before You Die' 
adopts a tripartite structure and uses autobiographical anecdot es to communicate a 
message of resilience and personal integrity. This inspiring sp eech was delivered 
at Stanford University 2005 commencement address.
Reading
Now read the following transcript of Steve Jobs’ full speech. 
I am honoured to be with you today at your commencement from on e of the finest 
universities in the world. 
Truth be told, I never graduated from college, and this is the closest I’ve ever gotten to 
a college graduation. 
Today I want to tell you three stories from my life. That’s it.  No big deal. Just three 
stories.
The first story is about connecting the dots.
I dropped out of Reed College after the first six months, but t hen stayed around as a 


=== PAGE 269 ===

 English: Grade 11 262
drop-in for another 18 months or so before I really quit. So why did I drop out?
It started before I was born. My biological mother was a young, unwed college graduate 
student, and she decided to put me up for adoption. She felt very strongly that I should 
be adopted by college graduates, so everything was all set for me to be adopted at 
birth by a lawyer and his wife. Except that when I popped out they decided at the last 
minute that they really wanted a girl. So my parents, who were on a waiting list, got a 
call in the middle of the night asking: “We have an unexpected baby boy; do you want 
him?” They said: “Of course.” My biological mother later found out that my mother 
had never graduated from college and that my father had never g raduated from high 
school. She refused to sign the final adoption papers. She only  relented a few months 
later when my parents promised that I would someday go to college.
And 17 years later I did go to college. But I naively chose a college that was almost as 
expensive as Stanford, and all of my working-class parents’ savings were being spent 
on my college tuition. After six months, I couldn’t see the val ue in it. I had no idea 
what I wanted to do with my life and no idea how college was going to help me figure 
it out. And here I was spending all of the money my parents had saved their entire life. 
So I decided to drop out and trust that it would all work out OK. It was pretty scary at 
the time, but looking back it was one of the best decisions I e ver made. The minute I 
dropped out I could stop taking the required classes that didn’t interest me, and begin 
dropping in on the ones that looked interesting.
It wasn’t all romantic. I didn’t have a dorm room, so I slept o n the floor in friends’ 
rooms, I returned Coke bottles for the 5¢ deposits to buy food with, and I would walk 
the 7 miles across town every Sunday night to get one good meal  a week at the Hare 
Krishna temple. I loved it. And much of what I stumbled into by following my curiosity 
and intuition turned out to be priceless later on. Let me give you one example:
Reed College at that time offered perhaps the best calligraphy instruction in the country. 
Throughout the campus every poster, every label on every drawer, was beautifully hand 
calligraphed. Because I had dropped out and didn’t have to take  the normal classes, 
I decided to take a calligraphy class to learn how to do this. I learned about serif 
and sans serif typefaces, about varying the amount of space bet ween different letter 
combinations, about what makes great typography great. It was b eautiful, historical, 
artistically subtle in a way that science can’t capture, and I found it fascinating.
None of this had even a hope of any practical application in my life. But ten years later, 
when we were designing the first Macintosh computer, it all came back to me. And we 

=== PAGE 270 ===

English: Grade 11 263
designed it all into the Mac. It was the first computer with be autiful typography. If I 
had never dropped in on that single course in college, the Mac would have never had 
multiple typefaces or proportionally spaced fonts. And since Windows just copied the 
Mac, it’s likely that no personal computer would have them. If I had never dropped 
out, I would have never dropped in on this calligraphy class, a nd personal computers 
might not have the wonderful typography that they do. Of course , it was impossible 
to connect the dots looking forward when I was in college. But it was very, very clear 
looking backward ten years later.
Again, you can’t connect the dots looking forward; you can only connect them looking 
backward. So you have to trust that the dots will somehow connect in your future. You 
have to trust in something — your gut, destiny, life, karma, wh atever. This approach 
has never let me down, and it has made all the difference in my life.
My second story is about love and loss.
I was lucky — I found what I loved to do early in life. Woz and I started Apple in my 
parents’ garage when I was 20. We worked hard, and in 10 years Apple had grown from 
just the two of us in a garage into a $2 billion company with over 4,000 employees. We 
had just released our finest creation — the Macintosh — a year earlier, and I had just 
turned 30. And then I got fired. How can you get fired from a c ompany you started? 
Well, as Apple grew we hired someone who I thought was very tal ented to run the 
company with me, and for the first year or so things went well.  But then our visions 
of the future began to diverge and eventually we had a falling out. When we did, our 
Board of Directors sided with him. So at 30 I was out. And very publicly out. What had 
been the focus of my entire adult life was gone, and it was devastating.
I really didn’t know what to do for a few months. I felt that I  had let the previous 
generation of entrepreneurs down — that I had dropped the baton  as it was being 
passed to me. I met with David Packard and Bob Noyce and tried to apologize for 
screwing up so badly. I was a very public failure, and I even t hought about running 
away from the valley. But something slowly began to dawn on me — I still loved what 
I did. The turn of events at Apple had not changed that one bit. I had been rejected, but 
I was still in love. And so I decided to start over.
I didn’t see it then, but it turned out that getting fired from Apple was the best thing that 
could have ever happened to me. The heaviness of being successf ul was replaced by 
the lightness of being a beginner again, less sure about everything. It freed me to enter 
one of the most creative periods of my life.

=== PAGE 271 ===

 English: Grade 11 264
During the next five years, I started a company named NeXT, another company named 
Pixar, and fell in love with an amazing woman who would become my wife. Pixar 
went on to create the world’s first computer animated feature f ilm, Toy Story, and is 
now the most successful animation studio in the world. In a remarkable turn of events, 
Apple bought NeXT, I returned to Apple, and the technology we developed at NeXT is 
at the heart of Apple’s current renaissance. And Laurene and I have a wonderful family 
together.
I’m pretty sure none of this would have happened if I hadn’t been fired from Apple. It 
was awful tasting medicine, but I guess the patient needed it. Sometimes life hits you 
in the head with a brick. Don’t lose faith. I’m convinced that the only thing that kept 
me going was that I loved what I did. You’ve got to find what y ou love. And that is 
as true for your work as it is for your lovers. Your work is go ing to fill a large part of 
your life, and the only way to be truly satisfied is to do what you believe is great work. 
And the only way to do great work is to love what you do. If you haven’t found it yet, 
keep looking. Don’t settle. As with all matters of the heart, you’ll know when you find 
it. And, like any great relationship, it just gets better and better as the years roll on. So 
keep looking until you find it. Don’t settle.
My third story is about death.
When I was 17, I read a quote that went something like: “If you  live each day as if it 
was your last, someday you’ll most certainly be right.” It made  an impression on me, 
and since then, for the past 33 years, I have looked in the mir ror every morning and 
asked myself: “If today were the last day of my life, would I w ant to do what I am 
about to do today?” And whenever the answer has been “No” for t oo many days in a 
row, I know I need to change something.
Remembering that I’ll be dead soon is the most important tool I ’ve ever encountered 
to help me make the big choices in life. Because almost everyth ing — all external 
expectations, all pride, all fear of embarrassment or failure —  these things just fall 
away in the face of death, leaving only what is truly important . Remembering that 
you are going to die is the best way I know to avoid the trap o f thinking you have 
something to lose. You are already naked. There is no reason not to follow your heart.
About a year ago I was diagnosed with cancer. I had a scan at 7:30 in the morning, and 
it clearly showed a tumour on my pancreas. I didn’t even know w hat a pancreas was. 
The doctors told me this was almost certainly a type of cancer that is incurable, and 
that I should expect to live no longer than three to six months. My doctor advised me to 

=== PAGE 272 ===

English: Grade 11 265
go home and get my affairs in order, which is doctor’s code for prepare to die. It means 
to try to tell your kids everything you thought you’d have the next 10 years to tell them 
in just a few months. It means to make sure everything is buttoned up so that it will be 
as easy as possible for your family. It means to say your goodbyes.
I lived with that diagnosis all day. Later that evening I had a biopsy, where they stuck 
an endoscope down my throat, through my stomach and into my int estines, put a 
needle into my pancreas and got a few cells from the tumour. I was sedated, but my 
wife, who was there, told me that when they viewed the cells un der a microscope the 
doctors started crying because it turned out to be a very rare form of pancreatic cancer 
that is curable with surgery. I had the surgery and I’m fine now.
This was the closest I’ve been to facing death, and I hope it’s  the closest I get for a 
few more decades. Having lived through it, I can now say this t o you with a bit more 
certainty than when death was a useful but purely intellectual concept:
No one wants to die. Even people who want to go to heaven don’t  want to die to get 
there. And yet death is the destination we all share. No one ha s ever escaped it. And 
that is as it should be, because Death is very likely the single best invention of Life. It 
is Life’s change agent. It clears out the old to make way for the new. Right now the new 
is you, but someday not too long from now, you will gradually become the old and be 
cleared away. Sorry to be so dramatic, but it is quite true.
Your time is limited, so don’t waste it living someone else’s l ife. Don’t be trapped 
by dogma — which is living with the results of other people’s t hinking. Don’t let the 
noise of others’ opinions drown out your own inner voice. And m ost important, have 
the courage to follow your heart and intuition. They somehow already know what you 
truly want to become. Everything else is secondary.
When I was young, there was an amazing publication called The Whole Earth Catalog, 
which was one of the bibles of my generation. It was created by  a fellow named 
Stewart Brand not far from here in Menlo Park, and he brought it to life with his poetic 
touch. This was in the late 1960s, before personal computers an d desktop publishing, 
so it was all made with typewriters, scissors and Polaroid came ras. It was sort of like 
Google in paperback form, 35 years before Google came along: It  was idealistic, and 
overflowing with neat tools and great notions.
Stewart and his team put out several issues of The Whole Earth Catalog, and then 
when it had run its course, they put out a final issue. It was the mid-1970s, and I 
was your age. On the back cover of their final issue was a phot ograph of an early 

=== PAGE 273 ===

 English: Grade 11 266
morning country road, the kind you might find yourself hitchhik ing on if you were 
so adventurous. Beneath it were the words: “Stay Hungry. Stay F oolish.” It was their 
farewell message as they signed off. Stay Hungry. Stay Foolish.  And I have always 
wished that for myself. And now, as you graduate to begin anew, I wish that for you.
Stay Hungry. Stay Foolish.
Thank you all very much.
NOTES
David Packard (1912-1996): an American electrical engineer and the co-founder of 
Hewlett-Packard Company, manufacturer of electronic measuring devices, calculators, 
and computers
Bob Noyce (1927-1990):  an American engineer and co-inventor of the integrated 
circuit
Stewart Brand (born in 1938): an American writer, best known as editor of the Whole 
Earth Catalog
Glossary
calligraphy (n.): decorative handwriting or handwritten lettering
commencement (n.):  a ceremony in which degrees or diplomas are conferred on 
graduating students
dogma (n.): a principle or belief accepted as true
generation (n.):  all of the people born and living at about the same time
intuition (n.): an ability to understand or know something immediately based on your 
feelings
naively (adv.): in a way that shows a lack of experience, wisdom, or judgment
relent (v.): to change one’s mind; agree to something
sedated (adj.): being in a calm, relaxed state
serif (n.):  a short line at the end of the main strokes of a letter
unwed (adj.): not married
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. What is the story about Steve Jobs’ birth?

=== PAGE 274 ===

English: Grade 11 267
b. What does he mean when he says, “you can’t connect the dots looking forward; 
you can only connect them looking backwards”?
c. What happened when Steve Jobs turned 30? 
d. Jobs contends that you need to love to do what you do in ord er to be great at it. 
Do you agree or disagree? Why?
e. Is death really life’s greatest invention?
 Reference to the context 
a. Read the extract given below and answer the questions that f ollow:
 “We have an unexpected baby boy; do you want him?” They said: “Of course.”
i. Who was the baby boy?
ii. What does ‘do you want him?’ mean?
iii. Who does ‘they’ refer to?
b. Explain the following lines:
i. “You have to trust in something — your gut, destiny, life, k arma, whatever.”
ii. “Your time is limited, so don’t waste it living someone els e’s life.”
c. What does he mean by “don’t settle”?
d. Which style of speech is used by the speaker to persuade the  audience?
e. It is not easy to motivate others. How do you think Steve Jo bs’ speech is so 
inspiring?
f. Why do you think Steve Jobs used the personal narrative story telling technique 
in his speech? What influence does it have on the audiences?
 Reference beyond the text 
a. One of Steve Jobs mottos was: 'Think differently'. Can this make a person 
succeed in life? What challenges are there in thinking differently?
b. What does the slogan “Stay hungry; stay foolish” mean to you ? 
c. What does it mean to be a visionary? What makes Steve Jobs d ifferent from a 
fortune teller?

=== PAGE 275 ===

 English: Grade 11 268
3 What I Require from Life
J.B.S. Haldane
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. What do you want to be in your life? 
b. Do you see equality in your society or any discrimination?
c. What are the basic needs of human beings?
John Burdon Sanderson Haldane  (1892-1964) 
was a British-Indian scientist known for his work 
in the study of physiology, genetics, evolutionary 
biology, and mathematics. His formal schooling 
was done at Eton College and New College at 
Oxford. He obtained his M.A. in 1914. Soon after, 
Haldane enlisted in the British Army and served 
during World War I. After returning from the war, 
Haldane began his teaching career at University.
Haldane's first paper in 1915 demonstrated genetic linkage in m ammals. Haldane 
was a professed socialist, Marxist, atheist and humanist. His political dissent led him 
to renounce his British citizenship in 1956 and live in India, becoming a naturalised 
Indian citizen. His major works include Daedalus (1924), Animal Biology  (with 
British evolutionist Julian Huxley, 1927), The Inequality of Man (1932), The Causes 
of Evolution  (1932), The Marxist Philosophy and the Sciences  (1938), Keeping 
Cool and Other Essays  (1940), Science Advances (1947), and The Biochemistry of 
Genetics (1954).
The essay 'What I Require from Life'  (1940), first published in The Daily Worker, 
reflects socialistic convictions demanding democratic activities in work places.  This 
essay is written in simple and lucid language.
Reading
I have got to accept the universe as it is. I must not require the impossible, and I shall 
do harm rather than good if I try to imagine perfect beings in a perfect world. But given 
the world as it is, I can say what I may reasonably hope both for myself and for others.


=== PAGE 276 ===

English: Grade 11 269
I was born in a peaceful age, and in my youth I looked forward to a life of peace. Since 
1914 I have been living in a heroic age, and I see no prospect of surviving into another 
epoch of peace and quiet. So I must try to make the best of the  time in which I live. 
What do I ask for myself? I assume that I have food, water, clothes, and shelter. 
First, work, and a decent wage for my work. Aristotle defined happiness, not as a sum 
of pleasures, but as unimpeded activity. I want work which is h ard but interesting, 
work of which I can see the fruits. I am exceptionally lucky be cause I can choose 
my own work to a large extent. If I want a respite from science  I can go and be a war 
correspondent, or write children’s stories, or make political speeches.
So I enjoy a good deal of my second requirement, freedom, in fa ct vastly more than 
most people. But I want still more, particularly more freedom of speech. I should like 
to say and write what I think about Lord Blank’s newspapers, Mr Dash’s pills, and Sir 
John Asterisk’s beer, all of which are poisonous. The law of li bel prevents me from 
doing so.
I require health. I don’t mind an occasional toothache or heada che, or even an acute 
illness every seven years or so. But I want to be fit for work and enjoyment in the 
intervals, and to die when I can work no longer.
I require friendship. Particularly I require the friendship of my colleagues and 
comrades in scientific and political work. I want the society o f equals who will 
criticize me, and whom I can criticize. I cannot be friends wit h a person whose 
orders I have to obey without criticism before or after, or wit h one who has to 
obey my orders in a similar way. And I find friendship with peo ple much richer or 
poorer than myself very difficult.
These four things are general human needs. For myself I also de mand adventure. 
Since my life is useful it would be wrong to risk it for the me re sake of risk, as by 
mountaineering or motor racing. As a physiologist I can try exp eriments on myself, 
and I can also participate in wars and revolutions of which I a pprove. By the way, 
love of adventure does not mean love of thrills. I spent six weeks in Madrid during the 
recent siege. The only thrill that I got there was from reading  Rimbaud’s poetry. The 
satisfaction of adventure is something much more solid than a thrill.
There are other things which I desire, but do not demand. I like to have a room of my 
own with some books, a motor-car, and a daily bath. I should li ke to have a garden, a 
bathing-pool, a beach, or a river within easy reach. But I have not, and I bear up quite 
happily.

=== PAGE 277 ===

 English: Grade 11 270
I am an exceptionally lucky person because I get a good deal of  what I want, and 
can work actively for the rest. But most of my fellows do not e njoy what I regard as 
essential requirements. And I cannot be completely happy while they are unhappy.
I want to see every healthy man and woman on the planet at work . But everywhere 
outside the Soviet Union there is unemployment, though very lit tle in Sweden. I am 
a socialist because unemployment, at least during times of depr ession, is an essential 
feature of capitalism. I want the workers to see the fruit of their own work not in profits 
for others, but in their own and their friends’ well-being. My main personal complaint 
is that my work is not applied. I discover new biological facts , but no use is made of 
them, because although the community would benefit, no individu als would make 
profits from their application.
I want to see the workers controlling their conditions of work as I control my own to 
a considerable extent. Most work is dull, much of it is unhealthy and exhausting. This 
need not be the case, and I believe will not be after a few generations of democracy in 
industry. How pleasant work can be shown by a simple fact. When  we have time and 
money to spare, two of our favourite occupations are hunting and gardening, the work 
of our paleolithic and neolithic ancestors respectively. I am a socialist because I want 
industry to be controlled by the workers. Freedom should begin in the workshop.
I want to see every man and woman as healthy as possible. This implies food, housing, 
and medical attendance of the quantity and quality which human biology demands and 
modern technique can supply.
I want to see the end of class subjection and sex subjection. O nly so will the equality 
which is the condition for fraternity be achieved. Since the ma in barriers between 
classes and the main reasons for the subjection of women are ec onomic, I look to a 
revolution in the economic field for their end.
I am a socialist because I want to see my fellow men and women enjoying the advantages 
which I enjoy myself. I know that socialism will not confer all these advantages in an 
instant, but if I live to see capitalism overthrown and the wor kers in power through 
most of Europe I shall die happy.
Certain things are lacking in my list of requirements, notably peace and security. It 
is futile to require things which one is most unlikely to obtai n. Fascism is a living 
reality, and fascism, as Hitler and Mussolini explicitly state, and prove by their actions, 
implies war. War is spreading at present. I sincerely hope that  it will not spread over 
the world, as it spread from 1914 to 1917; but I do not look fo rward to perfect peace 

=== PAGE 278 ===

English: Grade 11 271
till fascism is dead.
I fully realize that peace and security are rightful aims, and that my own desire for 
violent adventure is probably merely an adaptation to the age i n which I live. I am a 
child of my age, and all the worse for being one. I therefore d emand security rather 
than adventure for others.
I have said nothing about many things which I desire to see, su ch as a spread of 
education, and an increasing application of scientific methods in all branches of life. 
From what I have seen in Russia and in Spain I do not doubt that these and other good 
things would follow almost automatically if our class distinctions were abolished.
To sum up, for myself I require food, warmth, work, liberty, health, and friendship. For 
the society in which I live I require socialism.
Supplementary to my requirements of life are my requirements of  death. Of all men 
whose deaths are recorded, I consider that Socrates’ was the most enviable. He died for 
his convictions, when he could easily have survived by betraying them. He died at the 
age of about seventy, still in full possession of his faculties , but having completed all 
the work which he could reasonably hope to do. And he died laughing. His last words 
were a joke.
I do not require of death that I shall be as fortunate as Socra tes. A death which 
fulfils all the three conditions of his is very rare. But if I can achieve even two of 
them I shall have done well, and though my friends may lament m e, I trust that 
they will not pity me.
NOTES
Aristotle (384-322 B.C.): an ancient Greek philosopher, student of Plato and founder 
of Western philosophy
Lord Blank, Mr Dash, Sir John Asterisk: names invented for humorous effect
Madrid: the Spanish capital
Rimbaud: Jean Nicolas Arthur Rimbaud (1854-1891) was a French poet and the 
Symbolist. 
Fascism: a political system of government led by a dictator having complete power
Hitler: Adolf Hitler (1889-1945) was the leader of the Nazi Party who rose to become 
dictator of Germany (1933–45) whose fascist agenda led to World War II.

=== PAGE 279 ===

 English: Grade 11 272
Mussolini: Benito Mussolini (1883-1945) was an Italian political leader who became 
the fascist dictator of Italy (1925-1945).
Socrates (470-399 B.C.): an ancient Greek philosopher
Glossary
ancestors (n.): forefathers, predecessors
confer (v.): grant or bestow (a title, degree, benefit, or right)
decent (adj.): satisfactory, reasonable, fair
enviable (adj.): arousing or likely to arouse envy
epoch (n.): a period of time in history or a person's life
fraternity (n.): brotherhood, friendship
futile (adj.): incapable of producing any useful result; pointless
lament (v.): to express deep regret, grief, or sorrow
libel (n.): a published false statement that is damaging to a person's reputation
neolithic (adj.): relating to or denoting the later part of the Stone Age
paleolithic (adj.): relating to or denoting the early phase of the Stone Age
prospect (n.): possibility, likelihood
respite (n.): a short period of rest or relief from something difficult or unpleasant
siege (n.): a military blockade of a city or fortified place to compel it to surrender
thrill (n.): a sudden feeling of excitement and pleasure
unimpeded (adj.): not obstructed or hindered
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. How does the writer distinguish between a peaceful age and a  heroic age?
b. Why does the writer want more freedom of speech than most pe ople?
c. According to the writer, what are the four general human nee ds?
d. What is the difference between desire and demand according t o the writer?
e. Why does the writer demand security?
 Reference to the context 
Explain the following lines with reference to the context:

=== PAGE 280 ===

English: Grade 11 273
a. “The satisfaction of adventure is something much more solid than a thrill.”
b. “I want the workers to see the fruit of their own work not i n profits for others, 
but in their own and their friends’ well-being.”
c. Why do you think the essayist has taken reference from the a ncient philosophers?
d. Discuss the essay in terms of its language, purpose, subject , point of view and 
mode of writing. 
 Reference beyond the text 
a. What do you require from your life to be happy and satisfied ?
b. What is socialism? How is it different from capitalism?
c. Write an essay about your dream house.

=== PAGE 281 ===

 English: Grade 11 274
4 What is Poverty?
Jo Goodwin Parker
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. What do you consider poverty to be? Do you 
have a definitive explanation of it or do you 
consider it an abstract circumstance? 
b. Look at this picture. What do you see? 
Where do you see such people? Who are the 
poor? Why are they poor? Where do the poor 
usually live? 
Jo Goodwin Parker was an anonymous person from 
West Virginia, the Southern United States. Parker 
mailed her essay to George Henderson, preferring 
that the editor present no byline. George Henderson, 
a professor at the University of Oklahoma, received it 
while he was writing his 1971 book, America’s Other 
Children: Public Schools Outside Suburbia.
It was signed “Jo Goodwin Parker” . No further information was ever discovered 
about the essay or its source. Whether the author of this essay was in reality a woman 
describing her own painful experiences or a sympathetic writer who had adopted her 
persona, Jo Goodwin Parker remains a mystery. So in keeping wit h the spirit of its 
initial publication, Parker’s essay is kept here without any biographical data about its 
author.
Jo Goodwin Parker’s essay 'What is Poverty?'  is about Parker who has personally 
experienced rural poverty. She explains her story from childhoo d to adulthood. Her 
struggles are overwhelming. Using examples drawn from personal experience, she 
explains the meaning of poverty in this essay. Her use of connotative language creates 
many harsh images of her experiences in a life of poverty illus trating the difficulties 
and challenges her impoverished family experiences. The essay is a personal account, 
addressed directly to the reader, about living in poverty.


=== PAGE 282 ===

English: Grade 11 275
Reading
You ask me what is poverty? Listen to me. Here I am, dirty, sme lly, and with no 
“proper” underwear on and with the stench of my rotting teeth near you. I will tell you. 
Listen to me. Listen without pity. I cannot use your pity. List en with understanding. 
Put yourself in my dirty, worn out, ill-fitting shoes, and hear me.
Poverty is getting up every morning from a dirt- and illness-st ained mattress. The 
sheets have long since been used for diapers. Poverty is living  in a smell that never 
leaves. This is a smell of urine, sour milk, and spoiling food sometimes joined with the 
strong smell of long-cooked onions. Onions are cheap. If you have smelled this smell, 
you did not know how it came. It is the smell of the outdoor pr ivy. It is the smell of 
young children who cannot walk the long dark way in the night. It is the smell of the 
mattress where years of “accidents” have happened. It is the sm ell of the milk which 
has gone sour because the refrigerator long has not worked, and  it costs money to get 
it fixed. It is the smell of rotting garbage. I could bury it, but where is the shovel? 
Shovels cost money.
Poverty is being tired. I have always been tired. They told me at the hospital when the 
last baby came that I had chronic anemia caused from poor diet, a bad case of worms, 
and that I needed a corrective operation. I listened politely—t he poor are always 
polite. The poor always listen. They don’t say that there is no  money for iron pills, 
or better food, or worm medicine. The idea of an operation is f rightening and costs 
so much that, if I had dared, I would have laughed. Who takes c are of my children? 
Recovery from an operation takes a long time. I have three children. When I left them 
with “Granny” the last time I had a job, I came home to find th e baby covered with
fly specks, and a diaper that had not been changed since I left . When the dried diaper 
came off, bits of my baby’s flesh came with it. My other child was playing with a 
sharp bit of broken glass, and my oldest was playing alone at the edge of a lake. I made 
twenty-two dollars a week, and a good nursery school costs twenty dollars a week for 
three children. I quit my job.
Poverty is dirt. You can say in your clean clothes coming from your clean house, 
“Anybody can be clean.” Let me explain about housekeeping with no money. For 
breakfast, I give my children grits with no oleo or cornbread w ithout eggs and oleo. 
This does not use up many dishes. What dishes there are, I wash in cold water and with 
no soap. Even the cheapest soap has to be saved for the baby’s diapers. Look at my 
hands, so cracked and red. Once I saved for two months to buy a jar of Vaseline for my 

=== PAGE 283 ===

 English: Grade 11 276
hands and the baby’s diaper rash. When I had saved enough, I we nt to buy it and the 
price had gone up two cents. The baby and I suffered on. I have to decide every day if 
I can bear to put my cracked sore hands into the cold water and  strong soap. But you 
ask, why not hot water? Fuel costs money. If you have a wood fi re, it costs money. 
If you burn electricity, it costs money. Hot water is a luxury. I do not have luxuries. I 
know you will be surprised when I tell you how young I am. I look so much older. My 
back has been bent over the wash tubs every day for so long, I cannot remember when 
I ever did anything else. Every night I wash every stitch my sc hool age child has on 
and just hope her clothes will be dry by morning. 
Poverty is staying up all night on cold nights to watch the fir e knowing one spark on 
the newspaper covering the walls means your sleeping child dies in flames. In summer, 
poverty is watching gnats and flies devour your baby’s tears when he cries. The screens 
are torn and you pay so little rent you know they will never be  fixed. Poverty means 
insects in your food, in your nose, in your eyes, and crawling over you when you sleep. 
Poverty is hoping it never rains because diapers won’t dry when it rains and soon you 
are using newspapers. Poverty is seeing your children forever with runny noses. Paper 
handkerchiefs cost money and all your rags you need for other t hings. Even more 
costly are antihistamines. Poverty is cooking without food and cleaning without soap.
Poverty is asking for help. Have you ever had to ask for help, knowing your children 
will suffer unless you get it? Think about asking for a loan fr om a relative, if this 
is the only way you can imagine asking for help. I will tell yo u how it feels. You 
find out where the office is that you are supposed to visit. Yo u circle that block 
four or five times. Thinking of your children, you go in. Every one is very busy. 
Finally, someone comes out and you tell her that you need help.  That never is the 
person you need to see. You go see another person, and after sp illing the whole
shame of your poverty all over the desk between you, you find that this isn’t the right 
office after all—you must repeat the whole process, and it neve r is any easier at the 
next place.
You have asked for help, and after all it has a cost. You are again told to wait. You are 
told why, but you don’t really hear because of the red cloud of  shame and the rising 
cloud of despair. 
Poverty is remembering. It is remembering quitting school in ju nior high because 
“nice” children had been so cruel about my clothes and my smell . The attendance 
officer came. My mother told him I was pregnant. I wasn’t, but she thought that I could 

=== PAGE 284 ===

English: Grade 11 277
get a job and help out. I had jobs off and on, but never long enough to learn anything. 
Mostly I remember being married. I was so young then. I am stil l young. For a time, 
we had all the things you have. There was a little house in another town, with hot water 
and everything. Then my husband lost his job. There was unemployment insurance for 
a while and what few jobs I could get. Soon, all our nice things were repossessed and 
we moved back here. I was pregnant then. This house didn’t look so bad when we first 
moved in. Every week it gets worse. Nothing is ever fixed. We n ow had no money. 
There were a few odd jobs for my husband, but everything went f or food then, as it 
does now. I don’t know how we lived through three years and three babies, but we did. 
I’ll tell you something, after the last baby I destroyed my marriage. It had been a good 
one, but could you keep on bringing children in this dirt? Did you ever think how much 
it costs for any kind of birth control? I knew my husband was l eaving the day he left, 
but there were no good-byes between us. I hope he has been able  to climb out of this 
mess somewhere. He never could hope with us to drag him down.
That’s when I asked for help. When I got it, you know how much it was? It was, and 
is, seventy-eight dollars a month for the four of us; that is all I ever can get. Now you 
know why there is no soap, no needles and thread, no hot water,  no aspirin, no worm 
medicine, no hand cream, no shampoo. None of these things forever and ever and ever. 
So that you can see clearly, I pay twenty dollars a month rent, and most of the rest goes 
for food. For grits and cornmeal, and rice and milk and beans. I try my best to use only 
the minimum electricity. If I use more, there is that much less for food.
Poverty is looking into a black future. Your children won’t pla y with my boys. They 
will turn to other boys who steal to get what they want. I can already see them behind 
the bars of their prison instead of behind the bars of my pover ty. Or they will turn to 
the freedom of alcohol or drugs, and find themselves enslaved. And my daughter? At 
best, there is for her a life like mine.
But you say to me, there are schools. Yes, there are schools. My children have no extra 
books, no magazines, no extra pencils, or crayons, or paper and  most important of 
all, they do not have health. They have worms, they have infect ions, they have pink-
eye all summer. They do not sleep well on the floor, or with me  in my one bed. They 
do not suffer from hunger, my seventy-eight dollars keep us ali ve, but they do suffer 
from malnutrition. Oh yes, I do remember what I was taught abou t health in school. 
It doesn’t do much good. In some places there is a surplus commodities program. Not 
here. The country said it cost too much. There is a school lunc h program. But I have 
two children who will already be damaged by the time they get to school.

=== PAGE 285 ===

 English: Grade 11 278
But, you say to me, there are health clinics. Yes, there are health clinics and they are in 
the towns. I live out here eight miles from town. I can walk that far (even if it is sixteen 
miles both ways), but can my little children? My neighbour will take me when he goes; 
but he expects to get paid, one way or another. I bet you know my neighbour. He is 
that large man who spends his time at the gas station, the barb ershop, and the corner 
store complaining about the government spending money on the im moral mothers of 
illegitimate children.
Poverty is an acid that drips on pride until all pride is worn away. Poverty is a chisel 
that chips on honour until honour is worn away. Some of you say  that you would do 
something in my situation, and maybe you would, for the first week or the first month, 
but for year after year after year?
Even the poor can dream. A dream of a time when there is money. Money for the right 
kinds of food, for worm medicine, for iron pills, for toothbrushes, for hand cream, for 
a hammer and nails and a bit of screening, for a shovel, for a bit of paint, for some 
sheeting, for needles and thread. Money to pay in money for a t rip to town. And, oh, 
money for hot water and money for soap. A dream of when asking for help does not 
eat away the last bit of pride. When the office you visit is as nice as the offices of other 
governmental agencies, when there are enough workers to help yo u quickly, when 
workers do not quit in defeat and despair. When you have to tell your story to only one 
person, and that person can send you for other help and you don ’t have to prove your 
poverty over and over and over again.
I have come out of my despair to tell you this. Remember I did not come from another 
place or another time. Others like me are all around you. Look at us with an angry 
heart, anger that will help you help me. Anger that will let you tell of me. The poor are 
always silent. Can you be silent too?
Glossary
antihistamines (n.): a drug used to treat allergies
chronic (adj.): long-standing, long-term
diapers (n.): thick soft paper or cloth wrapped around a baby's bottom and between its 
legs to absorb and retain urine
enslave (v.): make a slave
illegitimate (adj.): illegal, unlawful
immoral (adj.): not having morality

=== PAGE 286 ===

English: Grade 11 279
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. What is poverty according to Parker?
b. How is poverty difficult for Parker’s children? List some sp ecific examples.
c. How does Parker try to obtain help, and what problems does s he encounter?
d. Why are people’s opinions and prejudices her greatest obstac les?
e. How does Parker defend her inability to get help? How does s he discount the 
usual solutions society has for poverty (e.g., welfare, educati on, and health 
clinics)?
 Reference to the context 
a. Explain the following:
 Poverty is looking into a black future.
b. What does Parker mean by “The poor are always silent”?
c. What writing strategy does the author use at the beginning o f most of the 
paragraphs? Do you notice a recurring pattern? What is it?
d. How does Parker develop each paragraph? What details make ea ch paragraph 
memorable?
e. In the final paragraph, how does the author use questions to  involve the reader in 
the issue of poverty?
 Reference beyond the text 
a. Define a social problem (homelessness, unemployment, racism)  imitating 
Parker’s style.
b. Using adjectives to highlight the futility of the situation,  write a short definition 
essay on Growing up in Poverty.

=== PAGE 287 ===

 English: Grade 11 280
5 Scientific Research is a Token of 
Humankind’s Survival
Vladimir Keilis-Borok
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. What is science? What do the scientists do?
b. We are all scientists. The nature of science can be captured to our ordinary experiences. 
Share your scientific experiences that you have got in your everyday life.
c. Work in pairs and then complete the following table.
Professionals Writer Lawyer Teacher Scientist
V ocation arguing
Field Literature
Reward freedom
Vladimir Keilis-Borok  (1921-2013) was a 
Russian mathematical geophysicist and seismologist. He 
taught at the University of California, Los Angeles. He was 
the research group leader of the International Institute for 
Earthquake Prediction Theory and Mathematical Geophysics, 
Russian Academy of Science.
He was also Co-director (and Founder) of the Research Programme  on non-linear 
dynamics and earthquake prediction of the Abdus Salam Internati onal Centre for 
Theoretical Physics, Trieste.
In the essay 'Scientific Research is a Token of Humankind’s Survival' , Keilis-Borok 
says about his profession as a scientist, and views that scienc e is the humankinds’ 
indispensable guardian and caretaker.
Reading
If you are so clever, why are you so poor? (Popular expression)  Why is it that some 
of us still decide to become scientists, despite the fact that businessmen, lawyers, and 
doctors enjoy a much higher income? A famous Russian writer L. Tolstoy once wrote 
that a writer is not merely a person who writes; a writer is a person who cannot live 
without writing. The same, I believe, is true for a scientist. Science is an exciting 


=== PAGE 288 ===

English: Grade 11 281
adventure where major reward comes from the discovery itself. W hat you get instead 
of big money is freedom, camaraderie, independence. The honours  and promotions 
will depend on yourself more than in the other occupations. And  you will have the 
overwhelming feeling of uncovering yet another one of nature’s mysteries.
An instant understanding, the efficiency of thought and action, and a good feeling that 
comes when the like-minded people work together. (F. Press)
It was 1960, the height of the cold war. I was in Moscow doing research on the theory 
of seismic waves—tremors in the earth generated by an earthquak e. I was absorbed 
in my problem; I enjoyed the mathematical challenge. I did not give much thought to 
how it connects with the real life.
The summons came from the President of the Russian (then Soviet ) Academy of 
Sciences. He had received a message from the Palace of Nations in Geneva, where 
technical experts from the Soviet Union, United States, and Uni ted Kingdom—three 
powers possessing nuclear weapons—met behind closed doors. The President showed 
me a letter from Geneva: an American scientist, Frank Press, qu oted my work while 
arguing with Moscow experts. And, to my great surprise, I found myself in Geneva.
At that time every man, woman, and child on the Earth lived und er the threat of 
annihilation by nuclear weapon. Each superpower had more than e nough nuclear 
bombs to destroy the others in the first strike. But in the 20 minutes it took for the 
rockets to reach their targets, the other side had plenty of ti me to launch retaliation 
strikes ensuring the destruction of their enemies only a few minutes later. This threat of 
‘Mutually Assured Destruction,’ with ominous acronym ‘MAD,’ was  for some years 
the only thin thread protecting all of us from the common fatal fate. Continuing nuclear 
tests meant development of even stronger bombs, introducing eve n more imbalance 
into the global nuclear standoff. The three nuclear powers were willing to come to an 
agreement, putting a ban on the nuclear weapon test. And hence, the technical experts 
were summoned to solve the problem that arose.
In formal terms, the problem was the following. Suppose that:(i ) the nuclear powers 
had signed agreement to stop the test of the new nuclear weapon s, and (ii) one of the 
participants had violated this agreement and secretly made an u nderground nuclear 
explosion. The problem is: how can the other powers detect the violation?
It turned out that this problem had a direct connection with th e theory of seismic 
waves. Underground nuclear explosions produced earth tremors ve ry similar to those 
generated by earthquakes. How could one distinguish the natural  tremors from the 

=== PAGE 289 ===

 English: Grade 11 282
ones produced by the explosion? Suddenly, my theoretical knowle dge had a direct 
application in the area of survival of the humankind.
In the atmosphere of the ongoing Cold War, with political tensi ons hanging over our 
heads, scientists and engineers from the opposite sides of the Iron Curtain had to find 
a solution, which outwardly seemed impossible, given all our di fferences in cultural 
background. What saved us was a clear and obvious distinction. We were all scientists. We
were able to work out a common language, based on respect to ha rd evidence, 
undisputable ranking by expertise only, and persistent self-cri ticism. We were able 
to work out a solution that eventually allowed politicians to r each one of the most 
important decisions of their times: nuclear test ban.
This episode taught me that as a scientist I have people all over the world who think and 
interact the way I do. It taught me never to feel lonely abroad. And, above all, it taught me 
that while there is science, there is hope of survival and well-being for all of us.
A common lore is that immersion in science does not go with pra ctical sense. 
It is true that on occasions a greatest mathematician of our ti me was so 
involved in a current problem that he could leave home wearing shoes from 
two different pairs. However, if you look carefully, you will f ind another side 
to this, which makes scientists the most practical people in th e world. All new 
technologies, all new brands of industry from defence to entert ainment stem
from fundamental research. Among past examples are antibiotics,  electronics, 
biotechnology, synthetic fibres, the green revolution, and gene tic forensic diagnosis, 
to name just a few. And now only the basic research could give us new sources of 
energy; new mineral deposits; efficient defence from terrorism;  cure from cancer; 
new forms of transportation. People trained in theoretical phys ics are headhunted by 
financial institutions; those trained in frontiers of biological research become founders 
and directors in the pharmaceutical industry. So, knowledge of basic science will give 
you a head start in whatever career you choose.
It is commonly recognised, that the very survival of our civili sation is threatened by 
natural and man-made disasters. Among them are earthquakes, self-inflicted destruction 
of megacities, environmental catastrophes, economic and social crises. Today, a 
massive release of radioactivity from a nuclear waste disposal,  an earthquake in the 
middle of a megalopolis, an outburst of mass violence, or any other global disaster, can 
cause up to a million of casualties, render large part of our w orld inhabitable, trigger 
global economic depression, or a war in a “hot” region. Such da ngers keep growing, 
although trillions dollars a year are spent to contain them by all known techniques.

=== PAGE 290 ===

English: Grade 11 283
The hope and the responsibility for breaking the stalemate rest  not on the money 
but on intellectual resources, though the money is more popular , according to the 
French proverb: “Nobody is satisfied with his wealth, everybody  is satisfied with his 
wisdom.” Only the basic research can create a springboard for developing new disaster 
preparedness industry.
Ours is the time of contest over issues not completely understood. (Mc George Bundy)
Scientific research is an exciting venture into the great unkno wn and the token of 
humankind’s survival. It is the scientists with their tools tha t are up to the challenge 
and can ensure that we all safely move with the time.
Finally, I have to remind you that the science is not the begin ning and the end. More 
important for the humankind and for each individual are the human qualities. However, 
if humanly used, science is their indispensable guardian and caretaker.
NOTES
Iron Curtain:  the name for the socio-political border that was believed to e xist 
between Western Europe and the communist countries of Central and Eastern Europe
L. Tolstoy: (Leo Tolstoy) a Russian writer, author of the novel War and Peace
Mc George Bundy:  He was United States National Security Advisor to presidents 
John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson.
Glossary
acronym (n.): a word made from the first letters of the name of any organisation, e.g. 
MAD (Mutually Assured Destruction) 
annihilation (n.): complete destruction
camaraderie (n.): a feeling of close friendship in a team overwhelming (adj.): a great 
effect on you that you feel very happy; overpowering
cold war: intense economic, political, military, and ideological conflict between nations
forensic (adj.): of scientific method of finding out about a crime
indisputable (adj.): known to be true
lore (n.): information about a subject
ominous (adj.): making you feel that something bad is going to happen 
retaliation (n.): counterattack, revenge
self-inflict (v.): to cause pain or problem for oneself

=== PAGE 291 ===

 English: Grade 11 284
stalemate (n.): a situation without an agreement or disagreement
standoff (n.): a situation in which one side counterbalances the other a standstill
venture (n.): anew risky activity 
war mystery (n.): something that people do not know anything about it; an unknown
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. What does a scientist get instead of big money?
b. What was the problem that the nuclear powers had faced? 
c. In which area did Keilis Borok's theoretical knowledge have a direct application?
d. What was the important decision that the politicians took be fore Geneva Summit?
e. What are the natural and man-made disasters as mentioned by the author?
 Reference to the context 
a. The professional addressed as ‘you’ in the sentence “If you are clever, why are 
you so poor?” refers to a… 
i. lawyer ii. doctor iii. scientist iv. businessman.
Justify your choice.
b. The writer says, “I found myself in Geneva.” What does it ex press?
c. Are the following statements true? Why or why not? Discuss w ith your partner.
i. Money is more powerful than intellectual resources.
ii. Intellectual resources help survival of the mankind.
iii. Basic research is a way of stalling disasters.
d. How does the essayist justify that scientific research is th e humankind’s survival?
e. What can be the purpose of the essayist of using quotations in the essay?
f. Discuss and illustrate the writer’s stand that scientists ar e the most practical 
people in the world.
 Reference beyond the text 
a. Everyone lives under the fear of annihilation by nuclear wea pons. Explain this 
statement.
b. The essayist says ‘While there is science, there is hope of survival and well-
being for all of us.’ Explain it.
c. Is science a blessing or a curse? Write an essay on it.

=== PAGE 292 ===

English: Grade 11 285
Unit 4 One Act Plays
1 Trifles
Susan Glaspell
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. In what ways do societal norms affect you?
b. Are women dominated by men in your society?
c. Are there differences between men and women in how they thin k, act, 
communicate, behave and relate to others?
Susan Glaspell  (1876-1948) was an American 
playwright, novelist, journalist and actress. First 
known for her short stories (fifty were published), 
Glaspell is known also to have written nine novels, 
fifteen plays, and a biography. Her works typically 
explore contemporary social issues, such as gender, 
ethics, and dissent, while featuring deep, sympathetic 
characters. Her first novel The Glory of the Conquered 
was published in 1909. She wrote three best-selling 
novels Brook Evans (1928), Fugitive's Return (1929), 
and Ambrose Holt and Family (1931).
Her first play Trifles (1916) was based on the murder trial she had covered as a 
young reporter in Des Moines. Her play Alison's House (1930) earned the Pulitzer 
Prize for drama in 1931. Glaspell is today recognized as a pioneering feminist writer 
and America's first important modern female playwright. 
The play Trifles revolves around murder investigation providing a perspective about 
the status of women in contemporary American society reflecting the male mentality 
as the dominant gender. 
Trifles chronicles the day after Mrs. Wright is arrested on sus picion of murdering 
her husband. Though the play is about the Wrights and the circu mstances of Mr. 
Wright’s death, Mrs. Wright never appears onstage. The audience  learns about her 
from the perspective of her neighbours and their reactions to i tems they find inside 
the Wrights’ home.


=== PAGE 293 ===

 English: Grade 11 286
Reading
Now read the following one act play about murder investigation.
Casting Characters
GEORGE HENDERSON, County Attorney  
HENRY PETERS, Sheriff and husband of Mrs. Peters  
LEWIS HALE, a neighbouring farmer of the Wrights  
MRS. PETERS, Wife of the sheriff  
MRS. HALE, Neighbour to the Wrights and wife of Lewis Hale  
(The kitchen in the now abandoned farmhouse of John Wright, a g loomy kitchen, and left 
without having been put in order—unwashed pans under the sink, a loaf of bread outside the 
bread-box, a dish-towel on the table—other signs of incomplete work. At the rear the outer 
door opens and the Sheriff comes in followed by the County Atto rney and Hale. The Sheriff 
and Hale are men in middle life, the County Attorney is a young man; all are much bundled up 
and go at once to the stove. They are followed by the two women—the Sheriff’s wife first; she 
is a slight wiry woman, a thin nervous face. Mrs. Hale is larger and would ordinarily be called 
more comfortable looking, but she is disturbed now and looks fe arfully about as she enters. 
The women have come in slowly, and stand close together near the door.)
COUNTY ATTORNEY: (at stove rubbing his hands) This feels good. Come up to 
the fire, ladies.
MRS. PETERS: (after taking a step forward). I’m not—cold.
SHERIFF: (unbuttoning his overcoat and stepping away from the stove to right of 
table as if to mark the beginning of official business). Now, Mr. Hale, before we move 
things about, you explain to Mr. Henderson just what you saw wh en you came here 
yesterday morning.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: (crossing down to left of the table) By the way, has anything 
been moved? Are things just as you left them yesterday?
SHERIFF: (looking about) It’s just the same. When it dropped below zero last night, 
I thought I’d better send Frank out this morning to make a fire  for us— (sits right of 
centre table) no use getting pneumonia with a big case on, but I told him not to touch 
anything except the stove—and you know Frank.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: Somebody should have been left here yesterday.

=== PAGE 294 ===

English: Grade 11 287
SHERIFF: Oh—yesterday. When I had to send Frank to Morris Centre for th at man 
who went crazy—I want you to know I had my hands full yesterday. I knew you could 
get back from Omaha by today and as long as I went over everything here myself—
COUNTY ATTORNEY: Well, Mr. Hale, tell just what happened when you came 
here yesterday morning.
HALE: (crossing down to above table)  Harry and I had started to town with a load 
of potatoes. We came along the road from my place and as I got here I said, “I’m 
going to see if I can’t get John Wright to go in with me on a p arty telephone.” I 
spoke to Wright about it once before and he put me off, saying folks talked too much 
anyway, and all he asked was peace and quiet— I guess you know about how much he
talked himself; but I thought maybe if I went to the house and talked about it before 
his wife, though I said to Harry that I didn’t know as what his wife wanted made much 
difference to John—
COUNTY ATTORNEY:  Let’s talk about that later, Mr. Hale. I do want to 
talk about that, but tell now just what happened when you got t o the house.
HALE: I didn’t hear or see anything; I knocked at the door, and  still it was all 
quiet inside. I knew they must be up, it was past eight o’clock . So I knocked again, 
and I thought I heard somebody say, “Come in.” I wasn’t sure, I ’m not sure yet, 
but I opened the door—this door (indicating the door by which the two women 
are still standing)  and there in that rocker— (pointing to it) sat Mrs. Wright.
(They all look at the rocker downstage left.)
COUNTY ATTORNEY: What—was she doing?
HALE: She was rock in’ back and forth. She had her apron in her hand and was kind 
of—pleating it.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: And how did she—look?
HALE: Well, she looked queer.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: How do you mean—queer?
HALE: Well, as if she didn’t know what she was going to do next. And kind of done up.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: (takes out notebook and pencil and sits left of center table) 
How did she seem to feel about your coming?
HALE: Why, I don’t think she minded—one way or other. She didn’t pay much attention. 
I said, “How do, Mrs. Wright, it’s cold, ain’t it?” And she said, “Is it?”—and went on 

=== PAGE 295 ===

 English: Grade 11 288
kind of pleating at her apron. Well, I was surprised; she didn’t ask me to come up to the 
stove, or to set down, but just sat there, not even looking at me, so I said, “I want to see 
John.” And then she— laughed. I guess you would call it a laugh. I thought of Harry and 
the team outside, so I said a little sharp: “Can’t I see John?” “No,” she says, kind o’ dull 
like. “Ain’t he home?” says I. “Yes,” says she, “he’s home.” “Then why can’t I see him?” I
asked her, out of patience. “Cause he’s dead,” says she. “Dead?” says I. She just nodded 
her head, not getting a bit excited, but rockin’ back and forth . “Why—where is he?” 
says I, not knowing what to say. She just pointed upstairs—like that (himself pointing 
to the room above) . I started for the stairs, with the idea of going up there. I walked 
from there to here—then I says “Why, what did he die of?” “He d ied of a rope round 
his neck,” says she, and just went on pleatin’ at her apron. Well, I went out and called 
Harry. I thought I might— need help. We went upstairs and there he was lyin’—
COUNTY ATTORNEY: I think I’d rather have you go into that upstairs, where you 
can point it all out. Just go on now with the rest of the story.
HALE: Well, my first thought was to get that rope off. It looked . .  .  (Stops. His 
facetwitches.) . . . but Harry, he went up to him, and he said, “No, he’s dea d all 
right, and we’d better not touch anything.” So we went back dow nstairs. She was 
still sitting that same way. “Has anybody been notified?” I ask ed. “No,” says she, 
unconcerned. “Who did this, Mrs. Wright?” said Harry. He said i t business like—
and she stopped pleatin’ of her apron. “I don’t know,” she says . “You don’t know?” 
says Harry. “No,” says she. “Weren’t you sleepin’ in the bed wi th him?” says Harry. 
“Yes,” says she, “but I was on the inside.” “Somebody slipped a  rope round his neck 
and strangled him and you didn’t wake up?” says Harry. “I didn’ t wake up,” she 
said after him. We must ’a’ looked as if we didn’t see how that  could be, for after a
minute she said, “I sleep sound.” Harry was going to ask her more questions but I said 
maybe we ought to let her tell her story first to the coroner, or the sheriff, so Harry 
went fast as he could to Rivers’ place, where there’s a telephone.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: And what did Mrs. Wright do when she knew that you had 
gone for the coroner?
HALE: She moved from the rocker to that chair over there (pointing to a small chair 
in the downstage right corner)  and just sat there with her hands held together and 
looking down. I got a feeling that I ought to make some convers ation, so I said I had 
come in to see if John wanted to put in a telephone, and at that she started to laugh, and 
then she stopped and looked at me— scared. (The County Attorney, who has had his 

=== PAGE 296 ===

English: Grade 11 289
notebook out, makes a note.)  I dunno, maybe it wasn’t scared. I wouldn’t like to say 
it was. Soon Harry got back, and then Dr. Lloyd came, and you, Mr. Peters, and so I 
guess that’s all I know that you don’t.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: (rising and looking around)  I guess we’ll go upstairs 
first—and then out to the barn and around there. (To the Sheriff)  You’re convinced 
that there was nothing important here—nothing that would point to any motive?
SHERIFF: Nothing here but kitchen things. (The County Attorney, after again looking 
around the kitchen, opens the door of a cupboard closet in right wall. He brings a 
small chair from right—gets up on it and looks on a shelf. Pulls his hand away, sticky.)
COUNTY ATTORNEY: Here’s a nice mess. (The women draw nearer upstage canter.)
MRS. PETERS: (to the other woman)  Oh, her fruit; it did freeze. (To the Lawyer) 
She worried about that when it turned so cold. She said the fir e’d go out and her jars 
would break.
SHERIFF: (rises) Well, can you beat the women! Held for murder and worryin’ about 
her preserves.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: (getting down from chair) I guess before we’re through she 
may have something more serious than preserves to worry about. (crosses down right 
centre)
HALE: Well, women are used to worrying over trifles. (The two women move a little 
closer together.)
COUNTY ATTORNEY: (with the gallantry of a young politician)  And yet, for all 
their worries, what would we do without the ladies? (The women do not unbend. He 
goes below the centre table to the sink, takes a dipper full of water from the pail and, 
pouring it into a basin, washes his hands. While he is doing this, the Sheriff and Hale 
cross to cupboard, which they inspect. The County Attorney starts to wipe his hands on 
the roller towel, turns it fora cleaner place.)  Dirty towels! (Kicks his foot against the 
pans under the sink.) Not much of a housekeeper, would you say, ladies?
MRS. HALE: (stiffly) There’s a great deal of work to be done on a farm.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: To be sure. And yet (with a little bow to her) I know there 
are some Dickson County farmhouses which do not have such roller towels. (He gives 
it a pull to expose its full length again.)
MRS. HALE: Those towels get dirty awful quick. Men’s hands aren’t always as clean 

=== PAGE 297 ===

 English: Grade 11 290
as they might be.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: Ah, loyal to your sex, I see. But you and Mrs. Wright were 
neighbours. I suppose you were friends, too.
MRS. HALE: (shaking her head)  I’ve not seen much of her of late years. I’ve not 
been in this house—it’s more than a year.
COUNTY ATTORNEY:  (crossing to women upstage centre)  And why was that? 
You didn’t like her?
MRS. HALE: I liked her all well enough. Farmers’ wives have their hands f ull, Mr. 
Henderson. And then—
COUNTY ATTORNEY: Yes—?
MRS. HALE: (looking about) It never seemed a very cheerful place.
COUNTY ATTORNEY:  No—it’s not cheerful. I shouldn’t say she had the 
homemaking instinct.
MRS. HALE: Well, I don’t know as Wright had, either.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: You mean that they didn’t get on very well?
MRS. HALE: No, I don’t mean anything. But I don’t think a place’d be any cheerfuller 
for John Wright’s being in it.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: I’d like to talk more of that a little later. I want to get th e 
lay of things upstairs now. (He goes past the women to upstage right where steps lead 
to a stair door.)
SHERIFF: I suppose anything Mrs. Peters does will be all right. She was  to take 
in some clothes for her, you know, and a few little things. We left in such a hurry 
yesterday.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: Yes, but I would like to see what you take, Mrs. Peters, and 
keep an eye out for anything that might be of use to us.
MRS. PETERS: Yes, Mr. Henderson. (The men leave by upstage right door to stairs. 
The women listen to the men’s steps on the stairs, then look about the kitchen.)
MRS. HALE: (crossing left to sink)  I’d hate to have men coming into my kitchen, 
snooping around and criticizing. (She arranges the pans under sink which the lawyer 
had shoved out of place.)

=== PAGE 298 ===

English: Grade 11 291
MRS. PETERS: Of course it’s no more than their duty. (crosses to cupboard upstage right)
MRS. HALE: Duty’s all right, but I guess that deputy sheriff that came out to make the 
fire might have got a little of this on. (Gives the roller towel a pull.) Wish I’d thought 
of that sooner. Seems mean to talk about her for not having things slicked up when she 
had to come away in such a hurry. (Crosses right to Mrs. Peters at cupboard.)
MRS. PETERS: (who has been looking through cupboard, lifts one end of a towel 
that covers a pan) She had bread set. (Stands still.)
MRS. HALE:  (eyes fixed on a loaf of bread beside the breadbox, which is 
on a low shelf of the cupboard)  She was going to put this in there. (Picks up 
loaf, then abruptly drops it. In a manner of returning to familiar things.)  It’s a 
shame about her fruit. I wonder if it’s all gone. (Gets up on the chair and looks.)
I think there’s some here that’s all right, Mrs. Peters. Yes—here; (holding it toward the 
window) this is cherries, too. (looking again) I declare I believe that’s the only one.
(Gets down, jar in her hand. Goes to the sink and wipes it off on the outside.) She’ll feel 
awful bad after all her hard work in the hot weather. I remember the afternoon I put up 
my cherries last summer. (She puts the jar on the big kitchen table, centre of the room. 
With a sigh, is about to sit down in the rocking chair. Before she is seated realizes
what chair it is; with a slow look at it, steps back. The chair which she has touched 
rocks back and forth. Mrs. Peters moves to centre table and they both watch the chair 
rock for a moment or two.)
MRS. PETERS: (shaking off the mood which the empty rocking chair has evoked; 
now in a business-like manner she speaks) . Well, I must get those things from 
the front room closet. (She goes to the door at the right, but, after looking into 
the other room, steps back.)  You coming with me, Mrs. Hale? You could help me 
carry them. (They go in the other room; reappear, Mrs. Peters carrying a dress, 
petticoat and skirt, Mrs. Hale following with a pair of shoes.)  My, it’s cold in there.
(She puts the clothes on the big table, and hurries to the stove.)
MRS. HALE:  (right of centre table examining the skirt) . Wright was close.  I 
think maybe that’s why she kept so much to herself. She didn’t even belong to 
the Ladies’ Aid. I suppose she felt she couldn’t do her part, a nd then you don’t 
enjoy things when you feel shabby. I heard she used to wear pre tty clothes and be
lively, when she was Minnie Foster, one of the town girls singi ng in the 
choir. But that— oh, that was thirty years ago. This all you wa s to take in?
MRS. PETERS: She said she wanted an apron. Funny thing to want,  for there isn’t 

=== PAGE 299 ===

 English: Grade 11 292
much to get you dirty in jail, goodness knows. But I suppose just to make her feel more 
natural. (crosses to cupboard) She said they was in the top drawer in this cupboard. 
Yes, here. And then her little shawl that always hung behind the door. (Opens stair 
door and looks.) Yes, here it is. (Quickly shuts door leading upstairs.)
MRS. HALE: (abruptly moving toward her). Mrs. Peters?
MRS. PETERS: Yes, Mrs. Hale? (At up stage right door.)
MRS. HALE: Do you think she did it?
MRS. PETERS: (in a frightened voice). Oh, I don’t know.
MRS. HALE: Well, I don’t think she did. Asking for an apron and her littl e shawl. 
Worrying about her fruit.
MRS. PETERS: (Starts to speak, glances up, where footsteps are heard in the room 
above. In a low voice).  Mr. Peters says it looks bad for her. Mr. Henderson is awful 
sarcastic in a speech and he’ll make fun of her sayin’ she didn’t wake up.
MRS. HALE: Well, I guess John Wright didn’t wake when they was slipping that rope 
under his neck.
MRS. PETERS: (crossing slowly to table and placing shawl and apron on table with 
other clothing). No, it’s strange. It must have been done awful crafty and stil l. They 
say it was such a—funny way to kill a man, rigging it all up like that.
MRS. HALE: (crossing to left of Mrs. Peters table) . That’s just what Mr. Hale said. 
There was a gun in the house. He says that’s what he can’t understand.
MRS. PETERS: Mr. Henderson said coming out that what was needed for the cas e 
was a motive; something to show anger, or— sudden feeling.
MRS. HALE: (who is standing by the table). Well, I don’t see any signs of anger around here.
(She puts her hand on the dishtowel which lies on the table, stands looking down at 
table, one half of which is clean, the other half messy.)  It’s wiped to here. (Makes a 
move as if to finish work, then turns and looks at loaf of bread outside the breadbox. 
Drops towel. In that voice of coming back to familiar things.)  Wonder how they are 
finding things upstairs. (crossing below table to downstage right)  I hope she had it a 
little more readied-up up there. You know, it seems kind of sneaking. Locking her up 
in town and then coming out here and trying to get her own house to turn against her!
MRS. PETERS: But, Mrs. Hale, the law is the law.

=== PAGE 300 ===

English: Grade 11 293
MRS. HALE: I s'pose' tis. (unbuttoning her coat) Better loosen up your th ings, Mrs. 
Peters. You won’t feel them when you go out. (MRS. PETERS takes off her fur tippet, 
goes to hang it on chair back left of table, stands looking at the work basket on floor 
near downstage left window.)
MRS. PETERS: She was piecing a quilt. (She brings the large sewing basket to the 
centre table and they look at the bright pieces, Mrs. Hale above the table and Mrs. 
Peters left of it.)
MRS. HALE: It’s a log cabin pattern. Pretty, isn’t it? I wonder if she wa s goin’ to 
quilt it or just knot it? (Footsteps have been heard coming down the stairs. The Sheriff 
enters followed by Hale and the County Attorney.)
SHERIFF: They wonder if she was going to quilt it or just knot it! (The men laugh, 
the women look abashed.)
COUNTY ATTORNEY: (rubbing his hands over the stove) . Frank’s fire didn’t do 
much up there, did it? Well, let’s go out to the barn and get t hat cleared up. (The men 
go outside by upstage left door.)
MRS. HALE: (resentfully). I don’t know as there’s anything so strange, our takin’ up 
our time with little things while we’re waiting for them to get  the evidence. (She sits 
in chair right of table smoothing out a block with decision.) I don’t see as it’s anything 
to laugh about.
MRS. PETERS: (apologetically). Of course they’ve got awful important things on 
their minds. (Pulls up a chair and joins Mrs. Hale at the left of the table.)
MRS. HALE: (examining another block).  Mrs. Peters, look at this one. Here, this 
is the one she was working on, and look at the sewing! All the rest of it has been so 
nice and even. And look at this! It’s all over the place! Why, it looks as if she didn’t 
know what she was about! (After she has said this they look at each other, then start 
to glance back at the door. After an instant Mrs. Hale has pulled at a knot and ripped 
the sewing.)
MRS. PETERS: Oh, what are you doing, Mrs. Hale?
MRS. HALE: (mildly). Just pulling out a stitch or two that’s not sewed very good. 
(threading a needle) Bad sewing always made me fidgety.
MRS. PETERS: (with a glance at door, nervously) . I don’t think we ought to touch 
things.

=== PAGE 301 ===

 English: Grade 11 294
MRS. HALE: I’ll just finish up this end. (suddenly stopping and leaning forward) 
Mrs. Peters?
MRS. PETERS: Yes, Mrs. Hale?
MRS. HALE: What do you suppose she was so nervous about?
MRS. PETERS: Oh—I don’t know, I don’t know as she was nervous. I sometimes 
sew awful queer when I’m just tired. (Mrs. Hale starts to say something, looks at Mrs. 
Peters, then goes on sewing.)  Well, I must get these things wrapped up. They may 
be through sooner than we think. (putting apron and other things together)  I wonder 
where I can find a piece of paper, and string. (Rises.)
MRS. HALE: In that cupboard, maybe.
MRS. PETERS: (crosses right looking in cupboard). Why, here’s a birdcage. (Holds 
it up.) Did she have a bird, Mrs. Hale?
MRS. HALE: Why, I don’t know whether she did or not—I’ve not been here fo r so 
long. There was a man around last year selling canaries cheap, but I don’t know as she 
took one; maybe she did. She used to sing real pretty herself.
MRS. PETERS: (glancing around). Seems funny to think of a bird here. But she must 
have had one, or why would she have a cage? I wonder what happened to it?
MRS. HALE: I s’pose maybe the cat got it.
MRS. PETERS: No, she didn’t have a cat. She’s got that feeling some people have 
about cats—being afraid of them. My cat got in her room and she  was real upset and 
asked me to take it out.
MRS. HALE: My sister Bessie was like that. Queer, ain’t it?
MRS. PETERS: (examining the cage). Why, look at this door. It’s broke. One hinge 
is pulled apart. (Takes a step down to Mrs. Hale’s right.)
MRS. HALE: (looking too). Looks as if someone must have been rough with it.
MRS. PETERS: Why, yes. (She brings the cage forward and puts it on the table.)
MRS. HALE: (glancing toward upstage left door). I wish if they’re going to find any 
evidence they’d be about it. I don’t like this place.
MRS. PETERS:  But I’m awful glad you came with me, Mrs. Hale. It would be 
lonesome for me sitting here alone.

=== PAGE 302 ===

English: Grade 11 295
MRS. HALE: It would, wouldn’t it? (dropping her sewing) But I tell you what I do 
wish, Mrs. Peters. I wish I had come over sometimes when she wa s here. I—(looking 
around the room)—wish I had.
MRS. PETERS: But of course you were awful busy, Mrs. Hale—your house and your 
children.
MRS. HALE:  (rises and crosses left) . I could’ve come. I stayed away because it 
weren’t cheerful—and that’s why I ought to have come. I (looking out left window)—
I’ve never liked this place. Maybe because it’s down in a hollow and you don’t see the 
road. I dunno what it is, but it’s a lonesome place and always was. I wish I had come 
over to see Minnie Foster sometimes. I can see now—(shakes her head)
MRS. PETERS: (left of table and above it). Well, you mustn’t reproach yourself, Mrs. 
Hale. Somehow we just don’t see how it is with other folks until—something turns up.
MRS. HALE:  Not having children makes less work—but it makes a quiet house , 
and Wright out to work all day, and no company when he did come  in. (turning from 
window) Did you know John Wright, Mrs. Peters?
MRS. PETERS: Not to know him; I’ve seen him in town. They say he was a good man.
MRS. HALE: Yes—good; he didn’t drink, and kept his word as well as most, I guess, 
and paid his debts. But he was a hard man, Mrs. Peters. Just to  pass the time of day 
with him—(shivers). Like a raw wind that gets to the bone. (pauses, her eye falling on 
the cage) I should think she would’ a’ wanted a bird. But what do you su ppose went 
with it?
MRS. PETERS: I don’t know, unless it got sick and died. (She reaches over and 
swings the broken door, swings it again, both women watch it.)
MRS. HALE:  You weren’t raised round here, were you? (Mrs. Peters shakes her 
head.) You didn’t know—her?
MRS. PETERS: Not till they brought her yesterday.
MRS. HALE: She—come to think of it, she was kind of like a bird herself—real sweet 
and pretty, but kind of timid and—fluttery. How—she—did—change.  (Silence; then 
as if struck by a happy thought and relieved to get back to everyday things, crosses 
right above Mrs. Peters to cupboard, replaces small chair used to stand on to its 
original place downstage right.)  Tell you what, Mrs. Peters, why don’t you take the 
quilt in with you? It might take up her mind.

=== PAGE 303 ===

 English: Grade 11 296
MRS. PETERS:  Why, I think that’s a real nice idea, Mrs. Hale. There couldn’ t 
possibly be any objection to it, could there? Now, just what would I take? I wonder if 
her patches are in here—and her things. (They look in the sewing basket.)
MRS. HALE:  (crosses to right of table) . Here’s some red. I expect this has got 
sewing things in it. (Brings out a fancy box.) What a pretty box. Looks like something 
somebody would give you. Maybe her scissors are in here. (Opens box. Suddenly puts 
her hand to her nose.)  Why— (Mrs. Peters bends nearer, then turns her face away.
There’s something wrapped up in this piece of silk.
MRS. PETERS: Why, this isn’t her scissors.
MRS. HALE: (lifting the silk). Oh, Mrs. Peters— it’s—(Mrs. Peters bends closer.)
MRS. PETERS: It’s the bird.
MRS. HALE: But, Mrs. Peters—look at it! Its neck! Look at its neck! It’s all—other 
side to.
MRS. PETERS: Somebody—wrung—its—neck. (Their eyes meet. A look of growing 
comprehension, of horror. Steps are heard outside, Mrs. Hale slips box under quilt 
pieces, and sinks into her chair. Enter Sheriff and County Attorney. Mrs. Peters steps 
downstage left and stands looking out of window.)
COUNTY ATTORNEY: (as one turning from serious things to little pleasantries) . 
Well, ladies, have you decided whether she was going to quilt i t or knot it? (Crosses 
to centre above table.)
MRS. PETERS: We think she was going to— knot it. (Sheriff crosses to right of 
stove, lifts stove lid and glances at fire, then stands warming hands at stove.)
COUNTY ATTORNEY:  Well, that’s interesting, I’m sure. (Seeing the birdcage.)  
Has the bird flown?
MRS. HALE: (putting more quilt pieces over the box). We think the—cat got it.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: (preoccupied). Is there a cat? (Mrs. Hale glances in a quick 
covert way at Mrs. Peters.)
MRS. PETERS:  (turning from window takes a step in).  Well, not now. They’re 
superstitious, you know. They leave.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: (to Sheriff Peters, continuing an interrupted conversation). 
No sign at all of anyone having come from the outside. Their ow n rope. Now let’s go 

=== PAGE 304 ===

English: Grade 11 297
up again and go over it piece by piece. (They start upstairs.) It would have to have been 
someone who knew just the— (Mrs. Peters sits down left of table. The two women sit 
there not looking at one another, but as if peering into something and at the same time 
holding back. When they talk now it is in the manner of feeling their way over strange 
ground, as if afraid of what they are saying, but as if they cannot help saying it.)
MRS. HALE: (hesitantly and in hushed voice)  She liked the bird. She was going to 
bury it in that pretty box.
MRS. PETERS: (in a whisper). When I was a girl—my kitten—there was a boy took 
a hatchet, and before my eyes—and before I could get there— (covers her face an 
instant) If they hadn’t held me back I would have— (catches herself, looks upstairs 
where steps are heard, falters weakly)—hurt him.
MRS. HALE: (with a slow look around her) . I wonder how it would seem never to 
have had any children around. (pause) No, Wright wouldn’t like the bird—a thing that 
sang. She used to sing. He killed that, too.
MRS. PETERS: (moving uneasily). We don’t know who killed the bird.
MRS. HALE: I knew John Wright.
MRS. PETERS: It was an awful thing was done in this house that night, Mrs. Hale. 
Killing a man while he slept, slipping a rope around his neck t hat choked the life out 
of him.
MRS. HALE: His neck. Choked the life out of him. (Her hand goes out and rests on 
the birdcage.)
MRS. PETERS: (with rising voice). We don’t know who killed him. We don’t know.
MRS. HALE: (her own feeling not interrupted) . If there’d been years and years of 
nothing, then a bird to sing to you, it would be awful—still, after the bird was still.
MRS. PETERS: (something within her speaking). I know what stillness is. When we 
homesteaded in Dakota, and my first baby died—after he was two years old, and me 
with no other then—
MRS. HALE: (moving). How soon do you suppose they’ll be through looking for the 
evidence?
MRS. PETERS: I know what stillness is. (pulling herself back)  The law has got to 
punish crime, Mrs. Hale.

=== PAGE 305 ===

 English: Grade 11 298
MRS. HALE: (not as if answering that) . I wish you’d seen Minnie Foster when she 
wore a white dress with blue ribbons and stood up there in the choir and sang. (a look 
around the room) Oh, I wish I’d come over here once in a while! That was a crim e! 
That was a crime! Who’s going to punish that?
MRS. PETERS: (looking upstairs). We mustn’t— take on.
MRS. HALE: I might have known she needed help! I know how things can be—
for women. I tell you, it’s queer, Mrs. Peters. We live close t ogether and we live far 
apart. We all go through the same things— it’s all just a diffe rent kind of the same 
thing. (Brushes her eyes. Noticing the jar of fruit, reaches out for it.)  If I was you 
I wouldn’t tell her fruit was gone. Tell her it ain’t. Tell her  it’s all right. Take this
in to prove it to her. She—she may never know whether it was broke or not.
MRS. PETERS:  (takes the jar, looks about for something to wrap it in; takes 
petticoat from the clothes brought from the other room, very nervously begins 
winding this around the jar; in a false voice) . My, it’s a good thing the men 
couldn’t hear us. Wouldn’t they just laugh! Getting all stirred  up over a little
thing like a—dead canary. As if that could have anything to do with—with— wouldn’t 
they laugh! (The men are heard coming downstairs.)
MRS. HALE: (under her breath). Maybe they would—maybe they wouldn’t.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: No, Peters, it’s all perfectly clear except a reason for doing 
it. But you know juries when it comes to women. If there was so me definite thing. 
(Crosses slowly to above table. Sheriff crosses downstage right. Mrs. Hale and Mrs. 
Peters remain seated at either side of table.) Something to show—something to make 
a story about—a thing that would connect up with this strange way of doing it— (The 
women’s eyes meet for an instant. Enter Hale from outer door.)
HALE: (remaining upstage left by door). Well, I’ve got the team around. Pretty cold 
out there.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: I’m going to stay awhile by myself. (To the Sheriff)  You 
can send Frank out for me, can’t you? I want to go over everyth ing. I’m not satisfied 
that we can’t do better.
SHERIFF: Do you want to see what Mrs. Peters is going to take in? (The Lawyer 
picks up the apron, laughs.)
COUNTY ATTORNEY: Oh, I guess they’re not very dangerous things the ladies 
have picked out. (Moves a few things about, disturbing the quilt pieces which cover the 

=== PAGE 306 ===

English: Grade 11 299
box. Steps back.) No, Mrs. Peters doesn’t need supervising. For that matter a sheriff’s 
wife is married to the law. Ever think of it that way, Mrs. Peters?
MRS. PETERS: Not—just that way.
SHERIFF: (chuckling). Married to the law. (Moves to downstage right door to the 
other room.) I just want you to come in here a minute, George. We ought to take a look 
at these windows.
COUNTY ATTORNEY: (scoffingly). Oh, windows!
SHERIFF: We’ll be right out, Mr. Hale. (Hale goes outside. The Sheriff follows the 
County Attorney into the other room. Then Mrs. Hale rises, hands tight together, 
looking intensely at Mrs. Peters, whose eyes make a slow turn, finally meeting Mrs. 
Hale’s. A moment Mrs. Hale holds her, then her own eyes point the way to where the 
box is concealed. Suddenly Mrs. Peters throws back quilt pieces and tries to put the 
box in the bag she is carrying. It is too big. She opens box, starts to take bird out, 
cannot touch it, goes to pieces, stands there helpless. Sound of a knob turning in the 
other room, Mrs. Hale snatches the box and puts it in the pocket of her big coat. Enter 
County Attorney and Sheriff, who remains downstage right.)
COUNTY ATTORNEY: (crosses to upstage left door facetiously) . Well, Henry, at 
least we found out that she was not going to quilt it. She was going to—what is it you 
call it, ladies?
MRS. HALE: (standing centre below table facing front, her hand against her pocket). 
We call it—knot it, Mr. Henderson.
Glossary
abashed (adj.): embarrassed or ashamed
canary (n.): a small, yellow bird that is well known for its singing, sometimes kept as 
a pet 
coroner (n.):  the public employee responsible for investigating deaths that  are not 
thought to be from natural causes
facetiously (adv.): in a manner not meant to be taken seriously
fidgety (adj.): restless or uneasy
homestead (v.): (as provided by the federal Homestead Act of 1862) live in an area of 
public land granted to any US citizen willing to settle on and farm the land for at least 
five years

=== PAGE 307 ===

 English: Grade 11 300
pleat (v.): fold cloth
queer (adj.): strange; odd
quilt (v.): join together (layers of fabric) with lines of stitching to fo rm a warm bed 
covering 
resentfully (adv.): angrily, unhappily
scoffingly (adv.): scornfully
sheriff (n.): (in the US) an elected officer in a county who is responsible for keeping 
the peace
tippet (n.): a shawl or scarf
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. Do you believe that Mrs. Wright killed her husband? Explain.
b. Do you think Mr. Wright’ s death would have been uncovered if Mr. Hale hadn’t 
stopped by the Wrights’ home?
c. Why does Mrs. Hale think that Mrs. Wright’s worries about he r preserves indicate 
her innocence?
d. How does Mrs. Peters’ homesteading experience connect her to  Mrs. Wright?
e. How do the women’s perspectives on men differ?
 Reference to the context 
Read the extracts from the play given below and answer the questions that 
follow.
a. “MRS. PETERS:(glancing around). Seems funny to think of a bi rd here. But she 
must have had one, or why would she have a cage? I wonder what happened to 
it?
MRS. HALE: I s’pose maybe the cat got it.”
i. Who does ‘she’ refer to?
ii. What does the word ‘one’ stand for?
iii. What is the full form of “s’pose”
iv. What do you mean when Mrs. Hale says, “the cat got it”?
b. “MRS. HALE: Wright was close. …… she used to wear pretty clo thes and be 
lively, when she was Minnie Foster, one of the town girls singi ng in the choir. 

=== PAGE 308 ===

English: Grade 11 301
But that— oh, that was thirty years ago.”
i. Why does Mrs. Hale refer to Mrs. Wright as “Minnie Foster”? 
ii. What does her description tell you about Mrs. Wright?
iii. What does Mrs. Hale mean by “that was thirty years ago”?
c. What is the main theme of the play?
d. Discuss the symbolism used in the play.
e. Discuss the setting of the play. Does it have an impact on t he theme of the play?
 Reference beyond the text 
a. The credibility of a character is determined not only by the character’s thoughts 
and actions but also by what other characters say and think abo ut him or her. 
Discuss in relation to the characters of Trifles.
b. Dramatic irony occurs when the reader or audience has inform ation that is 
unknown to the characters in a play; it creates tension and suspense. Analyse the 
play discussing the author’s use of dramatic irony based on these questions:
 What information is crucial to the play Trifles? 
 How does the playwright use this information to create dramati c irony? 
 What effect does the dramatic irony have on the audience and o n the play?

=== PAGE 309 ===

 English: Grade 11 302
2 A Sunny Morning
Serafin and Joaquin Alvarez Quintero
(translated from the Spanish by Lucretia Xavier Floyd)
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. Have you ever had an unexpected meeting with someone in a pa rk? 
b. How do your expectations influence the way you interact with  others?
c. How have unexpected encounters in your life sometimes turned  out to be 
rewarding? 
Serafin Álvarez Quintero  (1871-1938) and Joaquin 
Alvarez Quintero (1873-1944) were Spanish dramatists. 
They grew up in Utrera, a small town near Seville in the 
region of Spain called Andalusia. They began writing 
for the theatre at a young age. They were popularly 
known as the Golden Boys  of the Madrid theatre. 
They collaborated in almost 200 dramas depicting the 
life, manners, and speech of Andalusia.
Their first stage piece, Gilito, was written in 1889. Among the  brothers' best-known 
works are the comedies The Flowers  (1901), A Sunny Morning  (1905), and The 
Merry Heart (1906), as well as the uncharacteristically serious Malvaloca (1912). 
Several of their plays were translated into English by Helen an d Harley Granville-
Barker (1927–32). Their complete collection of plays was published in seven volumes 
as Obras Completas in the early 1950s.
A Sunny Morning is a light comedy that narrates the reunion of two lovers now in 
their 70s meeting at a park who in their youth were passionate lovers but torn apart 
by the cruelty of fate. The setting of this play is a sunny morning in Madrid, Spain on 
a bench in the park.
Reading
 Casting Characters
DONA LAURA
PETRA, her maid
DON GONZALO


=== PAGE 310 ===

English: Grade 11 303
JUANITO, his servant
Scene: A park in Madrid, the capital of Spain
(A sunny morning in a retired corner of a park in Madrid. Autumn. A bench at 
right. Dona Laura, a handsome, white-haired old lady of about seventy, refined in 
appearance, her bright eyes and entire manner giving evidence that despite her age 
her mental faculties are unimpaired, enters leaning upon the arm of her maid, Petra. 
In her free hand she carries a parasol, which serves also as a cane.)
DONA LAURA: I am so glad to be here. I feared my seat would be occupied. W hat 
a beautiful morning!
PETRA: The sun is hot.
DONA LAURA: Yes, you are only twenty. (She sits down on the bench.)  Oh, I feel 
more tired today than usual. (Noticing Petra, who seems impatient.) Go, if you wish to 
chat with your guard.
PETRA: He is not mine, senora; he belongs to the park.
DONA LAURA: He belongs more to you than he does to the park. Go find him, but 
remain within calling  distance.
PETRA: I see him over there waiting for me.
DONA LAURA: Do not remain more than ten minutes.
PETRA: Very well, senora. (Walks toward right.)
DONA LAURA: Wait a moment.
PETRA: What does the senora wish?
DONA LAURA: Give me the bread crumbs.
PETRA: I don’t know what is the matter with me.
DONA LAURA: (Smiling.) I do. Your head is where your heart is—with the guard.
PETRA: Here, senora. (She hands Dona Laura a small bag. Exit Petra by right.)
DONA LAURA: Adios. (Glances toward trees at right.) Here they come! They know 
just when to expect me. (She rises, walks toward right, and throws three handfuls of 
bread crumbs.) These are for the spryest, these for the gluttons, and these for the little 
ones which are the most persistent. (Laughs. She returns to her seat and watches, with a 
pleased expression, the pigeons feeding.) There, that big one is always first! I know him 

=== PAGE 311 ===

 English: Grade 11 304
by his big head. Now one, now another, now two, now three— That little fellow is the 
least timid. I believe he would eat from my hand. That one takes his piece and flies up to 
that branch alone. He is a philosopher. But where do they all come from? It seems as if the 
news had spread. Ha, ha! Don’t quarrel. There is enough for all. I’ll bring more tomorrow.
(Enter Don Gonzalo and Juanito from left centre. Don Gonzalo is an old gentleman 
of seventy,  gouty and impatient. He leans upon Juanito’s arm and drags his feet 
somewhat she walks.)
DON GONZALO: Idling their time away! They should be saying Mass.
JUANITO: You can sit here, senor. There is only a lady. (Dona Laura turns her head 
and listens.)
DON GONZALO: I won’t, Juanito. I want a bench to myself.
JUANITO: But there is none.
DON GONZALO: That one over there is mine.
JUANITO: There are three priests sitting there.
DON GONZALO: Rout them out. Have they gone?
JUANITO: No, indeed. They are talking.
DON GONZALO: Just as if they were glued to the seat. No hope of their leavi ng. 
Come this way, Juanito. (They walk toward the birds, right.)
DONA LAURA: (Indignantly.) Look out!
DON GONZALO: Are you speaking to me, senora?
DONA LAURA: Yes, to you.
DON GONZALO: What do you wish?
DONA LAURA: You have scared away the birds who were feeding on my crumbs.
DON GONZALO: What do I care about the birds?
DONA LAURA: But I do.
DON GONZALO: This is a public park.
DONA LAURA: Then why do you complain that the priests have taken your bench?
DON GONZALO:  Senora, we have not met. I cannot imagine why you take the 
liberty of addressing me.  Come, Juanito. (Both go outright.)

=== PAGE 312 ===

English: Grade 11 305
DONA LAURA:  What an ill-natured old man! Why must people get so fussy 
and cross when they reach a certain age? (Looking toward right.) I am glad. 
He lost that bench, too. Serves him right for scaring the birds. He is furious. 
Yes, yes; find a seat if you can. Poor man! He is wiping the perspiration from 
his face. Here he comes. A carriage would not raise more dust than his feet.
(Enter Don Gonzalo and Juanito by right and walk toward left.)
DON GONZALO: Have the priests gone yet, Juanito?
JUANITO: No, indeed, senor. They are still there.
DON GONZALO: The authorities should place more benches here for these sunny  
mornings. Well, I suppose I must resign myself and sit on the bench with the old lady. 
(Muttering to himself, he sits at the extreme end of Dona Laura’s bench and looks at 
her indignantly. Touches his hat as he greets her.) Good morning.
DONA LAURA: What, you here again?
DON GONZALO: I repeat that we have not met.
DONA LAURA: I was responding to your salute.
DON GONZALO: “Good morning” should be answered by “good morning,” and that 
is all you should have  said.
DONA LAURA: You should have asked permission to sit on this bench, which i s 
mine.
DON GONZALO: The benches here are public property.
DONA LAURA: Why, you said the one the priests have was yours.
DON GONZALO: Very well, very well. I have nothing more to say. (Between his 
teeth.) Senile old lady! She ought to be at home knitting and counting her beads.
DONA LAURA: Don’t grumble any more. I’m not going to leave just to please you.
DON GONZALO: (Brushing the dust from his shoes with his handkerchief.)  If the 
ground were sprinkled a little it would be an improvement.
DONA LAURA: Do you use your handkerchief as a shoe brush?
DON GONZALO: Why not?
DONA LAURA: Do you use a shoe brush as a handkerchief?
DON GONZALO: What right have you to criticize my actions?

=== PAGE 313 ===

 English: Grade 11 306
DONA LAURA: A neighbour’s right.
DON GONZALO: Juanito, my book. I do not care to listen to nonsense.
DONA LAURA: You are very polite.
DON GONZALO: Pardon me, senora, but never interfere with what does not concern 
you.
DONA LAURA: I generally say what I think.
DON GONZALO: And more to the same effect. Give me the book, Juanito.
JUANITO: Here, senor. (Juanito takes a book from his pocket, hands it to Don 
Gonzalo,  then exits by right. Don Gonzalo, casting indignant glances at Dona Laura, 
puts on an  enormous pair of glasses, takes from his pocket a reading glass, adjusts 
both to suit him, and opens his book.)
DONA LAURA: I thought you were taking out a telescope.
DON GONZALO: Was that you?
DONA LAURA: Your sight must be keen.
DON GONZALO: Keener than yours is.
DONA LAURA: Yes, evidently.
DON GONZALO: Ask the hares and partridges.
DONA LAURA: Ah! Do you hunt?
DON GONZALO: I did, and even now—
DONA LAURA: Oh, yes, of course!
DON GONZALO: Yes, senora. Every Sunday I take my gun and dog, you understand, 
and go to one of my estates near Aravaca and kill time.
DONA LAURA: Yes, kill time. That is all you kill.
DON GONZALO:  Do you think so? I could show you a wild boar’s head in my 
study—
DONA LAURA: Yes, and I could show you a tiger’s skin in my boudoir. What d oes 
that prove?
DON GONZALO: Very well, senora, please allow me to read. Enough conversation.
DONA LAURA: Well, you subside, then.

=== PAGE 314 ===

English: Grade 11 307
DON GONZALO: But first I shall take a pinch of snuff. (Takes out snuff box.) Will 
you have some? (Offers box to Dona Laura.)
DONA LAURA: If it is good.
DON GONZALO: It is of the finest. You will like it.
DONA LAURA: (Taking pinch of snuff.) It clears my head.
DON GONZALO: And mine.
DONA LAURA: Do you sneeze?
DON GONZALO: Yes, senora, three times.
DONA LAURA: And so do I. What a coincidence! (After taking the snuff, they await 
the sneezes, both anxiously, and sneeze alternately three times each.)
DON GONZALO: There, I feel better.
DONA LAURA: So do I. (Aside.) The snuff has made peace between us.
DON GONZALO: You will excuse me if I read aloud?
DONA LAURA: Read as loud as you please; you will not disturb me.
DON GONZALO: (Reading.) “All love is sad, but sad as it is, it is the best thing that 
we know.” That is from Campoamor.
DONA LAURA: Ah!
DON GONZALO: (Reading.) “The daughters of the mothers I once loved kiss me 
now as they would a graven image.” Those lines, I take it, are in a humorous vein.
DONA LAURA: (Laughing.) I take them so, too.
DON GONZALO: There are some beautiful poems in this book. Here. “Twenty years 
pass. He returns.”
DONA LAURA: You cannot imagine how it affects me to see you reading with a ll 
those glasses.
DON GONZALO: Can you read without any?
DONA LAURA: Certainly.
DON GONZALO: At your age? You’re jesting.
DONA LAURA: Pass me the book, then. (Takes book; reads aloud.) “Twenty years 
pass. He  returns. And each, beholding the other, exclaims— Can it be that this is he? 

=== PAGE 315 ===

 English: Grade 11 308
Heavens, is it she?” (Dona Laura returns the book to DON GONZALO.)
DON GONZALO: Indeed, I envy you your wonderful eyesight.
DONA LAURA: (Aside.) I know every word by heart.
DON GONZALO: I am very fond of good verses, very fond. I even composed some 
in my youth.
DONA LAURA: Good ones?
DON GONZALO: Of all kinds. I was a great friend of Espronceda, Zorrilla, Bécquer, 
and others. I first met Zorrilla in America.
DONA LAURA: Why, have you been in America?
DON GONZALO: Several times. The first time I went I was only six years old.
DONA LAURA: You must have gone with Columbus in one of his caravels!
DON GONZALO:  (Laughing.) Not quite as bad as that. I am old, I admit, but I 
did not know Ferdinand and Isabella. (They both laugh.) I was also a great friend of 
Campoamor. I met him in Valencia. I am a native of that city.
DONA LAURA: You are?
DON GONZALO: I was brought up there and there I spent my early youth. Have you 
ever visited that city?
DONA LAURA: Yes, senor. Not far from Valencia there was a villa that, if still there, 
should retain memories of me. I spent several seasons there. It was many, many years 
ago. It was near the sea, hidden away among lemon and orange trees. They called it—
let me see, what did they call it—Maricela.
DON GONZALO: (Startled.) Maricela?
DONA LAURA: Maricela. Is the name familiar to you?
DON GONZALO: Yes, very familiar. If my memory serves me right, for we forget as 
we grow old, there lived in that villa the most beautiful woman I have ever seen, and I 
assure you I have seen many. Let me see— what was her name? Laura—Laura—Laura 
Llorente.
DONA LAURA: (Startled.) Laura Llorente?
DON GONZALO: Yes. (They look at each other intently.)
DONA LAURA: (Recovering herself.) Nothing. You reminded me of my best friend.

=== PAGE 316 ===

English: Grade 11 309
DON GONZALO: How strange!
DONA LAURA: It is strange. She was called “The Silver Maiden.”
DON GONZALO: Precisely, “The Silver Maiden.” By that name she was known in 
that locality. I seem to see her as if she were before me now, at that window with the 
red roses. Do you remember that window?
DONA LAURA: Yes, I remember. It was the window of her room.
DON GONZALO: She spent many hours there. I mean in my day.
DONA LAURA: [Sighing.] And in mine, too.
DON GONZALO: She was ideal. Fair as a lily, jet black hair and black eyes, with an 
uncommonly sweet expression. She seemed to cast a radiance wherever she was. Her 
figure was beautiful, perfect. “What forms of sovereign beauty God models in human 
clay!” She was a dream.
DONA LAURA: (Aside.) If you but knew that dream was now by your side, you 
would realize what dreams come to. (Aloud.) She was very unfortunate and had a sad 
love affair.
DON GONZALO: Very sad. (They look at each other.)
DONA LAURA: Did you hear of it?
DON GONZALO: Yes.
DONA LAURA: The ways of Providence are strange. (Aside.) Gonzalo!
DON GONZALO: The gallant lover, in the same affair—
DONA LAURA: Ah, the duel!
DON GONZALO: Precisely, the duel. The gallant lover was—my cousin, of whom 
I was very fond.
DONA LAURA: Oh, yes, a cousin? My friend told me in one of her letters the  story 
of that affair, which was truly romantic. He, your cousin, passed by on horseback every 
morning down the rose path under her window, and tossed up to her balcony a bouquet 
of flowers which she caught.
DON GONZALO: And later in the afternoon the gallant horseman would return b y 
the same path, and catch the bouquet of flowers she would toss him. Am I right?
DONA LAURA: Yes. They wanted to marry her to a merchant whom she would not  

=== PAGE 317 ===

 English: Grade 11 310
have.
DON GONZALO: And one night, when my cousin waited under her window to hear 
her sing, this other person presented himself unexpectedly.
DONA LAURA: And insulted your cousin.
DON GONZALO: There was a quarrel.
DONA LAURA: And later a duel.
DON GONZALO: Yes, at sunrise, on the beach, and the merchant was badly wounded. 
My cousin had to conceal himself for a few days and later to fly.
DONA LAURA: You seem to know the story well.
DON GONZALO: And so do you.
DONA LAURA: I have explained that a friend repeated it to me.
DON GONZALO: As my cousin did to me. (Aside.) This is Laura!
DONA LAURA: (Aside.) Why tell him? He does not suspect.
DON GONZALO: (Aside.) She is entirely innocent.
DONA LAURA: And was it you, by any chance, who advised your cousin to forg et 
Laura?
DON GONZALO: Why, my cousin never forgot her!
DONA LAURA: How do you account, then, for his conduct?
DON GONZALO: I will tell you. The young man took refuge in my house, fearfu l 
of the consequences of a duel with a person highly regarded in that locality. From my 
home he went to Seville, then came to Madrid. He wrote Laura many letters, some of 
them in verse. But undoubtedly they were intercepted by her par ents, for she never 
answered at all. Gonzalo then, in despair, believing his love lost to him forever, joined 
the army, went to Africa, and there, in a trench, met a glorious death, grasping the flag 
of Spain and whispering the name of his beloved Laura—
DONA LAURA: (Aside.) What an atrocious lie!
DON GONZALO: (Aside.) I could not have killed myself more gloriously.
DONA LAURA: You must have been prostrated by the calamity.
DON GONZALO: Yes, indeed, senora. As if he were my brother. I presume, though, 

=== PAGE 318 ===

English: Grade 11 311
on the contrary, that Laura in a short time was chasing butterf lies in her garden, 
indifferent to regret.
DONA LAURA: No senor, no!
DON GONZALO: It is woman’s way.
DONA LAURA: Even if it were woman’s way, “The Silver Maiden” was not of that 
disposition. My friend awaited news for days, months, a year, and no letter came. One 
afternoon, just at sunset, as the first stars were appearing, s he was seen to leave the 
house, and with quickening steps wend her way toward the beach,  the beach where 
her beloved had risked his life. She wrote his name on the sand , then sat down upon 
a rock, her gaze fixed upon the horizon. The waves murmured the ir eternal threnody 
and slowly crept up to the rock where the maiden sat. The tide rose with a boom and 
swept her out to sea.
DON GONZALO: Good heavens!
DONA LAURA: The fishermen of that shore who often tell the story affirm that it was 
a long time before the waves washed away that name written on the sand. (Aside.) You 
will not get ahead of me in decorating my own funeral.
DON GONZALO: (Aside.) She lies worse than I do.
DONA LAURA: Poor Laura!
DON GONZALO: Poor Gonzalo!
DONA LAURA: (Aside.) I will not tell him that I married two years later.
DON GONZALO: (Aside.) In three months I ran off to Paris with a ballet dancer.
DONA LAURA:  Fate is curious. Here are you and I, complete strangers, met b y 
chance, discussing the romance of old friends of long ago! We h ave been conversing 
as if we were old friends.
DON GONZALO:  Yes, it is curious, considering the ill-natured prelude to our  
conversation.
DONA LAURA: You scared away the birds.
DON GONZALO: I was unreasonable, perhaps.
DONA LAURA: Yes, that was evident. (Sweetly.) Are you coming again tomorrow?
DON GONZALO: Most certainly, if it is a sunny morning. And not only will I not 

=== PAGE 319 ===

 English: Grade 11 312
scare away the birds, but I will bring a few crumbs.
DONA LAURA:  Thank you very much. Birds are grateful and repay attention. I  
wonder where my maid is? Petra! (Signals for her maid.)
DON GONZALO: (Aside, looking at LAURA, whose back is turned.)  No, no, I will 
not reveal myself. I am grotesque now. Better that she recall the gallant horseman who 
passed daily beneath her window tossing flowers.
DONA LAURA: Here she comes.
DON GONZALO: That Juanito! He plays havoc with the nursemaids. (Looks right 
and signals with his hand.)
DONA LAURA: (Aside, looking at Gonzalo, whose back is turned.) No, I am too sadly 
changed. It is better he should remember me as the black eyed g irl tossing flowers as 
he passed among the roses in the garden. (Juanito enters by right, Petra by left. She has 
a bunch of violets in her hand.)
DONA LAURA: Well, Petra! At last!
DON GONZALO: Juanito, you are late.
PETRA: (To Dona Laura.) The guard gave me these violets for you, senora.
DONA LAURA: How very nice! Thank him for me. They are fragrant. (As she takes 
the violets from her maid a few loose ones fall to the ground.)
DON GONZALO: My dear lady, this has been a great honour and a great pleasure.
DONA LAURA: It has also been a pleasure to me.
DON GONZALO: Good-bye until tomorrow.
DONA LAURA: Until tomorrow.
DON GONZALO: If it is sunny.
DONA LAURA: A sunny morning. Will you go to your bench?
DON GONZALO: No, I will come to this—if you do not object?
DONA LAURA: This bench is at your disposal.
DON GONZALO: And I will surely bring the crumbs.
DONA LAURA: Tomorrow, then?
DON GONZALO: Tomorrow! (Laura walks away toward right, supported by her 

=== PAGE 320 ===

English: Grade 11 313
Maid. Gonzalo, before leaving with Juanito, trembling and with a great effort, stoops 
to pick up the violets Laura dropped. Just then Laura turns her head and surprises him 
picking up the flowers.)
JUANITO: What are you doing, senor?
DON GONZALO: Juanito, wait—
DONA LAURA: (Aside.) Yes, it is he!
DON GONZALO: (Aside.) It is she, and no mistake. (Dona Laura and Don Gonzalo 
wave farewell.)
DONA LAURA: “Can it be that this is he?”
DON GONZALO: “Heavens, is it she?” (They smile once more, as if she were again 
at the window and he below in the rose garden, and then disappear upon the arms of 
their servants.)
CURTAIN
NOTES
Senora: a Spanish way of addressing a married woman, similar to ‘Madam’. Senorita 
is the term used to address unmarried women, and senor is used to address men.
Adios: a courteous way of saying ‘goodbye’ in Spanish
Mass: a religious celebration held regularly in the Roman Catholic Church
Aravaca: a village near Madrid
Campoamor: Ramón de Campoamor (1817–1901), a Spanish poet and philosopher
Espronceda:  José de Espronceda (1808–1842), a Spanish romantic poet
Zorrilla: José Zorrilla (1817–1893), a Spanish romantic poet and dramatist
Bécquer: Gustavo Adolfo Bécquer (1836–1870), a Spanish poet
Ferdinand and Isabella:  the king and queen of Spain who financed Christopher 
Columbus’s voyage across the Atlantic Ocean in the late 1400s
Valencia: a city on the eastern coast of Spain
Seville: a city in southern Spain
Glossary
atrocious (adj.): very bad; disgusting; horrifyingly wicked
boudoir (n.): a woman’s bedroom

=== PAGE 321 ===

 English: Grade 11 314
caravels (n.): ships built in Spain and Portugal in the fifteenth century
duel (n.): a contest between two people with deadly weapons in order to settle a point 
of honour
glutton(n.): a person who is greedy for food
gouty (adj.): suffering from the swelling in the joints
snuff (n.): powdered tobacco
graven (adj.): carved
grotesque (adj.): comically or repulsively ugly or distorted
indignant (adj.): feeling or showing anger because of something unjust or unfair
parasol(n.):  a small, colourful umbrella used for protection from the sun
Providence (n.): a force that determines human fate; God
spryest (adj.): active and lively
threnody (n.): a song of lament for the dead
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. What makes Dona Laura think that Don Gonzalo is an ill-natur ed man? Why do 
neither Dona Laura nor Don Gonzalo reveal their true identities? 
b. At what point of time, do you think, Laura and Gonzalo begin  to recognise each 
other?
c. When does Dona Laura realise that Don Gonzalo was her former  lover?
d. Why do Dona Laura and Don Gonzalo spin fictitious stories ab out themselves?
e. How do Dona Laura and Don Gonzalo feel about each other?
 Reference to the context 
a. Look at the extract below and answer the questions that foll ow:
 “Yes, you are only twenty. (She sits down on the bench.) Oh, I  feel more tired 
today than usual. (Noticing Petra, who seems impatient.) Go, if you wish to chat 
with your guard.”
i. Who is the speaker? 
ii. Who does ‘you’ refer to?
iii. Who is the ‘guard’ the speaker is talking to?
b. Read the extract dialogue from the play and answer the quest ions that follow:

=== PAGE 322 ===

English: Grade 11 315
DONA LAURA: (Indignantly.) Look out!
DON GONZALO: Are you speaking to me, senora?
DONA LAURA: Yes, to you.
DON GONZALO: What do you wish?
DONA LAURA:  You have scared away the birds who were feeding on my 
crumbs.
DON GONZALO: What do I care about the birds?
DONA LAURA: But I do.
DON GONZALO: This is a public park.
c. Who is Dona addressing by saying “Look out”?
d. What was Dona doing?
e. Who scared the birds? Are they pet birds?
f. Where are the speakers at the time of the conversation?
g. What is the effect of flashback in the play when Dona Laura and Don Gonzalo 
knew that they were the lovers in the past?
h. Discuss how the play is built around humour and irony.
i. How is the title ‘A Sunny Morning’ justifiable? Discuss.
 Reference beyond the text 
a. What do you predict will happen in the next meeting between Dona Laura and 
Don Gonzalo? Discuss.
b. Was it wise for Dona Laura and Don Gonzalo to keep their ide ntities secret? 
How might their secrets affect future meetings?
c. Write the summary of the play.

=== PAGE 323 ===

 English: Grade 11 316
3 Refund
Fritz Karinthy
 Before Reading 
Answer these questions.
a. Will you demand your tuition fees back from the school if yo u don’t get any job 
in the future?
b. What do you want to be after getting education?
c. Does one’s certificate show the talent of that person?
Fritz Karinthy  (1887-1938) was a Hungarian 
satirical writer. He excelled as a novelist, short 
story writer, poet, essayist and playwright. 
Deeply interested in natural sciences, he studied 
to be a teacher, but became a journalist and 
joined the literary periodical Nyugat. Strongly 
philosophical and humanistic in his outlook, he 
raised his powerful voice against the barbarism 
and horrors of World War I. His works such as 
That’s How You Write  (1912), Journey around 
My Skull (1939), Please Sir (1916) and Professor 
won him a lot of recognition.
The play Refund written in 1938 is about a man about forty who goes back to th e 
school in which he had studied and demands a refund of the fees he had paid eighteen 
years back claiming that he had learnt nothing useful at school  and he is now good-
for-nothing. This play was adopted by the American playwright Percival Wilde for a 
general audience. Refund brings out the extraordinary sense of parody, word play in 
Karinthy’s literary art. The play is full of humour which deals with an extraordinarily 
absurd situation.
Reading
Now read the following hilarious literary play.
Casting Characters
THE PRINCIPAL


=== PAGE 324 ===

English: Grade 11 317
THE SERV ANT
WASSERKOPF
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER
THE PHYSICS MASTER
THE STAFF
THE GEOGRAPHY MASTER
THE HISTORY MASTER
(The Principal is seated at his flat-tapped desk in his office in a high school. Enter a 
servant.)
THE PRINICIPAL: Well, what is it?
THE SERVANT: A man, sir. Outside. He wants to see you.
THE PRINCIPAL: (leaning back and stretching) I receive parents only during office 
hours. The particular office hours are posted in the notice-board. Tell him that.
THE SERVANT: Yes, sir. Yes, sir. But it isn’t a parent, sir.
THE PRINCIPAL: A pupil?
THE SERVANT: I don’t think so. He has a beard.
THE PRINCIPAL: (disquieted) Not a parent and not a pupil. Then what is he?
THE SERVANT: He told me I should just say ‘Wasserkopf.’
THE PRINICIPAL: (much disquieted) What does he look like? Stupid? Intelligent?
THE SERVANT: Fairly intelligent, I’d say, sir.
THE PRINCIPAL: (reassured) Good! Then he’s not a school inspector. Show him in.
THE SERVANT: Yes, sir. (He goes off. An instant later the door reopens to admit a 
bearded man, carelessly dressed, somewhat under forty. He is energetic and decided)
WASSERKOPF: How do you do? (He remains standing)
THE PRINCIPAL: (rising) What can I do for you?
WASSERKOPF: I’m Wasserkopf. (He pauses) Don’t you remember me?
THE PRINCIPAL: (shaking his head) No.
WASSERKOPF: It’s possible I’ve changed. What the hell…! Your class records will 
show I’ve got a right to come here.

=== PAGE 325 ===

 English: Grade 11 318
THE PRINCIPAL: The class records? How so?
WASSERKOPF: Mr. Principal, if you please, I’m Wasserkopf.
THE PRINCIPAL: Doubtless, doubtless – but what has that to do with it?
WASSERKOPF: You mean to say you don’t even remember my name? [He thinks 
it over] No, I imagine you wouldn’t. You were probably glad to forget m e. Well, Mr. 
Principal, I was a student in this school eighteen years ago.
THE PRINCIPAL:  (without enthusiasm)  Oh, were you? Well, what do you want 
now? A certificate?
WASSERKOPF: (doubtfully) Since I’m bringing back the leaving certificate you 
gave me I suppose I can get along without another one. No, that isn’t why I came here.
THE PRINCIPAL: Well?
WASSERKOPF: (clearing his throat firmly) As a former pupil of this school I want 
you to refund the tuition fees, which were paid you for my education eighteen years ago.
THE PRINCIPAL: (incredulously) You want me to refund your tuition fees?
WASSERKOPF: Exactly; the tuition fees. If I were a rich man I’d tell you t o keep 
them, so far as I’m concerned. What the hell…! But I’m not a rich man, and I need the 
money.
THE PRINCIPAL: I’m not sure I understand.
WASSERKOPF: Dammit, I want my tuition fees back! Is that plain enough?
THE PRINCIPAL: Why do you want it back?
WASSERKOPF: Because I didn’t get my money’s worth, that’s why! This certificate 
here says I got an education. Well, I didn’t. I didn’t learn an ything and I want my 
money back.
THE PRINCIPAL: But, look here, look here! I don’t understand it at all! I’ve never 
heard of anything like it. What an absurd idea!
WASSERKOPF: Absurd, is it? It’s a good idea. It’s such a good idea that I didn’t get 
it out of my own head, thanks to the education I got here, whic h made nothing but an 
incompetent ass out of me. My old classmate Leaderer gave me th e idea not half an 
hour ago.
THE PRINCIPAL: Gave it to you?

=== PAGE 326 ===

English: Grade 11 319
WASSERKOPF: (nodding violently) Like that. Here I was walking along the street, 
fired from my last job, and wondering how I could get hold of s ome cash, because 
I was quite broke. I met Leaderer. I said, ‘How goes it, Leader er?’ ‘Fine!’ he says. 
‘I’ve got to hurry to the broker’s to collect the money I made speculating in foreign 
exchange.’ ‘What’s foreign exchange?’ I said. He says ‘I haven’ t got the time to tell 
you now, but, according to the paper, Hungarian money is down s eventy points, and 
I’ve made the difference. Don’t you understand?’ Well, I didn’t  understand. I said, 
‘How do you make money if money goes down?’ and he says, ‘Wasse rkopf, if you 
don’t know that, you don’t know a damn thing. Go to the school and get your tuition 
fees back.’ Then he hurried away and left me standing there, and I said to myself, ‘Why 
shouldn’t I do that?’ He’s right, now that I’ve thought it over . So I came here as fast 
as I could, and I’ll be much obliged if you give me back my tuition fees, because they 
amount to a lot of money, and I didn’t get anything for them.
THE PRINCIPAL: (at a loss for words) Really… But now… See here, we’ve never 
had a request like yours before. Leaderer told you –
WASSERKOPF: He’s a good friend, Leaderer. He told me, and when I get my money 
back I’m going to buy him a present.
THE PRINCIPAL: (rising) You – you are not really serious, are you?
WASSERKOPF: I was never more serious in my life. Treat me wrong here and I ’ll 
go straight to the Ministry of Education and complain about you! You took my money 
and you taught me nothing. Now I’m no good for anything, and I can’t do the things 
that I should have learned in school.
THE PRINCIPAL: You’re mad! (He breaks off, to continue in a more conciliatory 
tone) My dear sir, Herr – er – Wasserkopf, please go away quietly. I’ll think the matter 
over after you’ve gone.
WASSERKOPF: (sitting) No, no! You don’t get rid of me so easy. I’ll go when 
everything’s been settled. I was given the instruction here in exchange for money, so 
that I might be able to do something; but I can’t do anything b ecause I was taught so 
badly, and anybody can see I ought to have my money back.
THE PRINICIPAL:  (trying to gain time)  What makes you think you can’t do 
anything?
WASSERKOPF: Everybody thinks so. If I get a job I can’t keep it. Give me a n 
examination and tell me what I ought to do. Call in the masters and let them say.

=== PAGE 327 ===

 English: Grade 11 320
THE PRINICIPAL: What a distressing business! How unfortunate! You really want 
to take another examination?
WASSERKOPF: Yes. I’ve a right to take one.
THE PRINICIPAL: What an unusual case! (He scratches his head) I’ve never heard 
of anything like it before. Er – I shall have to consult the st aff. I shall have to call a 
conference… Er – will you wait in the waiting room and give me a few minutes?
WASSERKOPF: (rising) Yes, be quick. I’ve got no time to waste (he saunters out in 
a leisurely fashion.)
THE PRINICIPAL: (rings; the servant enters) Ask the staff to come here at once. A 
most extraordinary conference!
THE SERVANT: Yes, sir. (He goes out)
THE PRINCIPAL: (trying out his speech) Gentlemen, I have asked you to come here 
on account of a most unusual state of affairs. It is unpreceden ted. In the thirty years 
that I have been a schoolmaster I have never heard of anything like it. Never, so long as 
I live, shall I expect to hear of anything like it again. Never! God forbid! (The masters 
enter; they are characteristic figures whose eccentricities are exaggerated) Gentlemen, 
I have asked you to come here on account of a most unusual state of affairs. Sit down, 
gentlemen. I shall open the conference. It is unprecedented, incredible and fantastic. A 
former pupil has come to see me – er – an individual named Wass erkopf. He brought 
up a question, which I’ve never encountered in my many years of  experience. (He 
explodes) I have never heard of anything like it.
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER: Tell us about it.
THE PRINICIPAL: He wants – he wants his tuition fees back.
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER: Why?
THE PRINCIPAL: Because he’s lost his job. Because he’s broke. Because he’s an  
ass. I should be glad to have you express your views on this unparalleled case.
THE PHYSICS MASTER:  The case is natural. The law of conservation of energy 
proves that any given pupil will lose, in any given period, as much knowledge as a 
teacher can drill into his head in another period of like duration.
THE HISTORY MASTER: There is nothing like it in the history of civilization. It is 
said that the Bourbons learned nothing and forgot nothing. If that is true.

=== PAGE 328 ===

English: Grade 11 321
THE PHYSICS MASTER: The law of conservation of energy – (The two argue)
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER: The question is, does he want the amount with 
simple or compound interest, because in the latter event –
THE GEOGRAPHY MASTER: Where is the fellow, anyhow?
THE PRINCIPAL: He’s waiting outside. He wants to be re-examined. He says he 
learned nothing. He says a re-examination will prove it. I’d li ke to know what you 
gentlemen think about it.
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER:  (chuckling)  A re-examination? Gentlemen, 
it is my conviction that we will lose nothing by re-examining W asserkopf. If he 
fails, he will place us in an awkward position; therefore he mu st not fail. He has 
– shall I say? – pursued advanced studies in the school of life . We will not make 
our questions too difficult – agreed, gentlemen? We are dealing  with a sly, crafty 
individual, who will try to get the better of us – and his mone y back – by hook or 
crook. We must checkmate him.
THE PHYSICS MASTER: How?
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER: By sticking together. The object is to prevent him 
from failing, because if he fails he succeeds. That we must stop. If he fails, tomorrow 
there will be two more former pupils, and the next day a dozen.  We must back each 
other up, gentlemen, so that this painful affair does not become a pedagogical scandal. 
We will ask him questions. Whatever his answers, we agree befor ehand that they are 
correct.
THE PHYSICS MASTER: Who will decide?
THE MATHEMATICS TEACHER:  I, if you will permit me. Mr. Principal, let 
us proceed with the examination. We will show the former pupil that we too can be 
shrewd!
THE PRINCIPAL:  (ringing; uneasily)  Isn’t there a chance of something going 
wrong? Suppose it gets into the newspapers –
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER: Leave it to us.
THE PRINCIPAL: (to the servant who has reappeared)  Show in Herr Wasserkopf.
(He enters, without waiting to be shown in. He is most truculent. His hat is over one 
ear; he keeps his hands thrust into his pockets and stares insolently)
THE STAFF: (bowing, heartily) How do you do?

=== PAGE 329 ===

 English: Grade 11 322
WASSERKOPF: Who the hell are you? Sit down, you loafers! (He grins, waiting to 
be thrown out)
THE PRINCIPAL: How dare you –
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER: (interrupting) Please! (He turns to the others.) 
Sit down, you loafers! (They sit, greatly astonished. He turns to Wasserkopf.)  My 
dear sir, the greeting you have just given us shows that you understand the patriarchal 
manners, which we impress upon everybody in this institution. E xactly as in the 
days of the medieval humanists, teachers and pupils here are on  a footing of perfect 
equality. You have shown us, in a most tactful way, that you approve of our customs. 
That is good of you, and I am sure my colleagues will agree that the pupil Wasserkopf, 
who appears before us for re-examination, need not be examined in what appertains 
to gentlemanliness. Instead we waive the examination in that su bject, and mark him 
‘Excellent.’
THE PRINCIPAL:  (understanding at once)  Quite right! Quite right! (He writes) 
‘Manners: Excellent.’
THE STAFF: Agreed! Agreed!
WASSERKOPF: (puzzled, then shrugging his shoulders)  All right, if you say so. 
What the hell…! I don’t give a damn for the lot of you. My bein g gentlemanly isn’t 
going to pass the examination. Let me fail as quickly as possib le, and give me my 
money. Everything else is just nonsense.
THE PRINCIPAL:  (flattering) Speaking for the staff, we agree with you. Your 
exquisite courtesy will not affect us one way or the other. We will examine you, and be 
guided entirely by your replies to our questions. Take notice of that.
WASSERKOPF: All right, carry on! Let’s hear the questions. I need money. (He takes 
off his coat and hitches up his sleeve bands.) Go to it! Ask me questions, professors – I 
mean, long-eared asses! I’d like to see you get a single correct answer out of me.
THE PRINCIPAL: The examination will begin. History. Herr Schwefler?
THE HISTORY MASTER: (moving to the centre of the table and indicates a chair 
facing of it) Herr Wasserkopf, won’t you be seated?
WASSERKOPF: (staring at him insolently, arms akimbo) To hell with a seat! I’ll stand.
(THE HISTORY MASTER  is disconcerted, and shows it, but the Mathematics 
Master leaps into the breach)

=== PAGE 330 ===

English: Grade 11 323
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER:  Bravo! Excellent! Herr Wasserkopf wishes us 
to understand two things. He will dispense with a formal written examination and will 
answer orally. Good! He will not be seated; he will stand. Also good. It follows that his 
physical condition is splendid, and I take it upon myself to award him an ‘Excellent’ in 
physical culture. I ask the Principal, who teaches that subject, to concur.
THE PRINCIPAL: Quite Right. (He writes) ‘Physical Culture: Excellent’
THE STAFF: Agreed! Agreed!
WASSERKOPF: (energetically) No! (He sits; he grins.) You caught me once, didn’t 
you? Well, you won’t do it again. From now I’ll have my ears open.
THE PRINCIPAL: ‘Alertness: Very Good’
THE HISTORY MASTER: ‘Perseverance: Unusual.’
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER: ‘Logic: Excellent.’
WASSERKOPF: Get on with your questions!
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER: (to the Principal) ‘Ambition: Boundless.’ (The 
Principal nods and writes)
THE HISTORY MASTER: (scratching his head) Yes, yes, just a minute. (The other 
masters look at him with concern.)
WASSERKOPF: What’s the matter, Schwefler? Aren’t you prepared?
THE HISTORY MASTER: A moment!
WASSERKOPF: Oh, you can’t think of a question that’s easy enough? You were  
always a numskull.
THE HISTORY MASTER (the idea arrives; triumphantly) : Candidate, answer this 
question: How long did the Thirty Years’ War last?
WASSERKOPF: Thirt – (He interrupts himself.) I mean to say, I don’t know.
THE HISTORY MASTER: Please answer my questions! I am sure you know! Give 
me the answer! (Wasserkopf thinks with his eyebrows drawn together. The Physics 
Master tiptoes to him and whispers loudly, ‘Thirty years.’ The Geography Master 
winks at him and holds up ten fingers three times.) Well, well?
WASSERKOPF: Mr. Principal, this is no way to run an examination. (He indicates 
the Physics Master) That fellow is trying to make me cheat.

=== PAGE 331 ===

 English: Grade 11 324
THE PRINCIPAL: I shall deal with this decisively. (To the Physics Master) Go away!
(The Physics Master slinks back to his place)
WASSERKOPF (after much thought): How long did the Thirty Years’ War last? Was 
that the question?
THE HISTORY MASTER: Yes, yes!
WASSERKOPF: (grinning) I know! Exactly seven meters! (They are paralyzed. He 
looks about in triumph.) Ha, ha! Seven meters! I know it lasted that long. It’s possible 
I’m wrong, and if I am I fail. Seven meters! Ha, ha! Seven meters long! Seven meters! 
Please give me back my tuition fees. (The Masters look at each other; at their wits’ 
ends)
THE HISTORY MASTER: (decisively) Seven meters? Right! Your answer is excellent.
WASSERKOPF: (incredulously) What. What did you say?
THE HISTORY MASTER:  (swallowing manfully and watching the Principal out 
of the corner of his eye)  The answer is correct, as a matter of fact. The candidate 
has shown us that his thought processes are not merely superfic ial, and that he has 
investigated the subject in accordance with moderns researches based on – based on 
– based on –
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER:  Relativity, of course. The quantum theory. 
Planck. Einstein. It’s all very simple. (To the THE HISTORY MASTER)  Don’t say 
another word. We understand perfectly. Einstein has taught us t hat time is as real as 
space and matter. It consists of atoms, and may be synthesized into a unified whole, 
and may be measured like anything else. Reduce the mass-system to a unit and a year 
may be represented by a meter, or seven years by seven meters. We may even assert 
that the Thirty Years’ War lasted seven years only because – because – because –
THE HISTORY MASTER: Because the actual warfare took place only during half 
of each day – that is to say, twelve hours out of twenty-four –  and the thirty years at 
once become fifteen. But not even fifteen years were given up to incessant fighting, for 
the combatants had to eat – three hours a day, reducing our fifteen years to twelve. And 
if we deduct from this the hours given up to noon-day siestas, to peaceful diversions, 
to non-warlike activities – (He wipes his brow)
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER: To social distractions, we are left only with time 
which the candidate has represented by the Einsteinian equivale nt of seven meters. 
Correct! I take it upon myself, gentlemen, to propose a grading  of ‘Very Good’ in 

=== PAGE 332 ===

English: Grade 11 325
History. Oof!
THE STAFF: Bravo! Excellent! He has passed! (They congratulate Wasserkopf)
WASSERKOPF: (objecting) But I don’t see –
THE PRINCIPAL: That ends the examination in History. (Writing) ‘History: Very 
Good.’ (The staff surround THE HISTORY MASTER and congratulate him.) Now the 
examination in physics.
WASSERKOPF: Now we’ll see something, you tricksters!
THE PHYSICS MASTER (energetically): Come, come!
WASSERKOPF: (defiantly) Well, what’s going to happen? Ask your questions, or 
don’t. I haven’t got any more time to waste. (He stares at the Physics Master)  Oh, 
now I remember you. Do you know what we used to call you behind your back? (The 
Physics Master smiles in agony)  We called you cannibal, because you were always 
chewing your thumbs, just as you’re doing now! (The master removes his thumb 
hastily. The rest of the staff smile.) That’s what we called you! Oh, by the way, do you 
remember the day you tripped and fell flat in the aisle? Do you know who tied a string 
across from desk to desk, so you’d do that? I did it!
THE PHYSICS MASTER (furiously): You?
WASSERKOPF: Don’t get excited, little man. Ask me a hard question instead.  
Plough me.
THE PHYSICS MASTER  (controls himself, well aware that Wasserkopf is trying 
to irritate him. Very sweetly): Kind of you – very kind of you. And now, tell me, Herr 
Wasserkopf, do clocks in church steeples really become smaller as you walk away 
from them, or do they merely appear to become smaller because of an optical illusion?
WASSERKOPF: What an absolute rot? How should I know? Whenever I walk away 
from clocks they get larger! Invariably! If I want them to get smaller I turn round and 
walk straight up to them, and they’re not small at all.
THE PHYSICS MASTER: In a word, therefore, in a word –
WASSERKOPF: In a word, therefore, you give me a pain in the neck. You’re an ass! 
That’s my answer.
THE PHYSICS MASTER:  (furiously) Is that your answer? (He controls himself) 
Good! It is correct. (Turning to the staff)  A difficult answer but a most brilliant one. 

=== PAGE 333 ===

 English: Grade 11 326
I’ll explain – that is to say, I’ll explain. (With a sigh, he gets on with it) When we talk 
of an ass we always notice – we always notice –
THE STAFF: (anxiously) Yes? Yes?
THE PHYSICS MASTER:  that his look is sad. Therefore – (He thinks. Suddenly 
triumphant) I’ve got it!
WASSERKOPF: (worried) What have you got, you whiskered baboon?
THE PHYSICS MASTER:  I’ve got it, and the answer is right. Why is the look of 
the ass so sad? Because we are all the victims of illusion. But what illusions can affect 
the extremely primitive apperceptive powers of an ass? Obviousl y, the illusions of 
the senses, for the ass lacks imagination; and these must be no ne other than optical 
illusions, since the ass, like us, observes that objects appear  to become smaller as he 
moves away from them. The candidate has given us a most excellent answer in calling 
our attention to an animal whose whole expressions is melanchol y because its senses 
are deceptive; or, to put it in another way, because the apparent decrease in size of an 
object, in this case a clock, is to be ascribed to optical illusion. The answer was correct. 
I certify, therefore, that the candidate may be given ‘Very Good’ in Physics.
THE PRINCIPAL: (writing) ‘Physics: Very Good’
THE STAFF: Bravo! (They surround the Physics Master, slapping him on the back 
and shaking his hands, while he sinks into his chair, completely exhausted)
WASSERKOPF: I protest!
THE PRINCIPAL: (silencing him with a gesture)  The examination in Geography. 
(The Geography Master takes the place facing Wasserkopf)
WASSERKOPF: Just look at him! The old hypocrite! How are you, anyhow, nitwit?
THE GEOGRAPHY MASTER: I beg your pardon?
WASSERKOPF: My name used to be in our class-book, didn’t it? You old reprobate! 
You just wait! I’ll fix you all right!
THE GEOGRAPHY MASTER: Tell me, candidate –
WASSERKOPF: I’ll tell you! I’ll tell you! Oh, how I used to hate you eighteen years 
ago!
THE GEOGRAPHY MASTER:  (imperturbably) Please tell me what city of the 
same name is the capital of the German province of Brunswick?

=== PAGE 334 ===

English: Grade 11 327
WASSERKOPF: What a dumb question! The answer’s part of the question.
THE GEOGRAPHY MASTER: (pleased) Isn’t it? And the answer – what is it?
WASSERKOPF: ‘Same’ of course. That’s the answer. If the name of the city is same, 
then the name of the city is ‘Same.’ Right? If it isn’t I fail,  and you refund my tuition 
fees.
THE GEOGRAPHY MASTER:  The answer is correct. The name of the city 
is ‘Same.’ Gentlemen, the candidate shows exceptional knowledge  of the history 
of the city Brunswick. There is a legend that once, as the Empe ror Barbarossa 
was riding in to the city, he met a young peasant girl who was munching a bun, 
and whose mouth was full. He called out to her, ‘God bless you.  What’s the name 
of this city?’ and the peasant girl answered ‘Same to you, sir. ’ Then she stopped 
because her mouth was full, and the Emperor laughed and said, ‘ Ho, ho! So the 
name of the city is “Same.”?’ And for many years, thereafter, h e never referred to 
Brunswick, except by that title. (He turns, winks solemnly at his colleagues.)  The 
answer is excellent. The candidate is entitled to a grade of ‘E xcellent’ in Geography.
(He returns to his place to be showered with congratulations)
THE PRINCIPAL:  (writing) ‘Geography: Excellent.’ Thus far the candidate has 
come through with flying colours. Only the examination in mathematics is left. Should 
he pass that he will have passed the entire examination.
WASSERKOPF: (nervously) I’m going to be more careful now. (The Mathematics 
Master takes his place facing Wasserkopf. The Other Masters are worried but the 
Mathematics Master assures them with a gesture that they may depend on him.)  So 
here you are, old-stick-in-the-mud! Do you know we used to call  you ‘old-stick-in-
the-mud’ behind your back? You’d better brush up your wits if you think you’re going 
to put one over me. I’ll start off by telling you a few things about mathematics: two 
times two is five, and I make up my own multiplication tables a s I go along. And 
if you add eight apples and two pears the answer is twenty-seve n apricots. That’s 
my system, and you’ll see me use it. To hell with mathematics! ‘Answer excellent’? 
‘Answer very good’ ‘Answer correct’? Not this time. It will be simpler if you say you 
aren’t prepared, and let me fail.
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER: (forcibly) You must not joke about a serious 
examination. I’m going to ask you two questions. One of them is easy; the other is hard.
WASSERKOPF (imitating him): One of them is easy; the other is hard. The same 

=== PAGE 335 ===

 English: Grade 11 328
old-stick-in-the-mud that you always were! I remember the pictures of you we used to 
draw on the board –
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER: (interrupting) If this were an examination in art 
you would be marked excellent. ( He pauses, and Wasserkopf is suddenly silent.)  But 
we are dealing with mathematics. The easy question: If we represent the speed of light 
by x, and the distance of the star Sirius from the sun by y, what is the circumference of 
a one-hundred-and-nine-sided regular polyhedron whose surface c oincides with that 
of the hip-pocket of a State railway employee whose wife has been deceiving him for 
two years and eleven months with a regimental sergeant-major of hussars?
THE STAFF: (much upset) But look here, Professor! Professor!
THE PRINCIPAL: Professor!
WASSERKOPF: Don’t interfere with him! (To the Mathematics Master)  Will you 
repeat the question?
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER: No. Either you paid attention or you did not. Either 
you know the answer, or you don’t. Tell me the answer, because if you don’t know it –
WASSERKOPF: Of course I know it! Naturally I know it! I’ll tell you: two thousand 
six hundred and twenty nine litres. Exact. No fractions. And did I give you the correct 
answer? (He chuckles) I’ve given you an answer which is too good!
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER:  No. The answer is wrong. The correct answer 
is two thousand six hundred and twenty-eight litres, and not twenty nine. (He turns to 
The Principal) I refuse to pass the candidate. Mark him ‘Failure.’
WASSERKOPF: (bounding) I told you so! I told you so!
THE PRINCIPAL: (thunderstruck) Professor! Professor!
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER:  I’m sorry. It is true that his error amounted to 
less than a tenth of a percent, in the total, but it was an error. He fails.
WASSERKOPF: My tuition fees! My tuition fees!
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER:  In my opinion the candidate’s request is 
reasonable. Now that I have satisfied myself he cannot pass our  examination it is his 
right to recover the money which was paid us.
WASSERKOPF: That’s so! That’s right! Give me the money. (The staff stare as if the 
heaven had fallen)

=== PAGE 336 ===

English: Grade 11 329
THE PRINCIPAL: (furiously, to the Mathematics Master) Is that what you think?
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER:  Absolutely. This is a good school. It is our 
duty to see that nothing ever injures its reputation. How much do we owe you, Herr 
Wasserkopf?
WASSERKOPF: (greedily, forgetting everything else) I’ll tell you exactly. I attended 
this school for six years in all. During the first three years the fee was 150 crowns 
quarterly. Total for three years 1, 800. During the second thre e years the fee was 400 
crowns semi-annually. Total: 2, 400 and 1, 800 is 4, 200. Examination fees, 250 crowns 
95 heller. Certificates, documents, books, stamp taxes, 1, 241 crowns 43 heller. Total: 
5, 682 crowns 38 heller. Incidentals, stationery, notebooks, 78 6 crowns 12 heller. 
Grand total: 6, 450 crowns 50 heller. Knock of the heller and call it crowns.
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER:  (checking with his paper and pencil as 
Wasserkopf calls out the amount) Exactly!
WASSERKOPF: Exactly! You can rely on it.
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER: It’s right. There’s no question of it. It’s right to 
the smallest detail. (He offers Wasserkopf his hand) I congratulate you! That was my 
difficult question!
WASSERKOPF: (not understanding) What?
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER:  (to the Principal)  I certify that the candidate 
passes in Mathematics. His answer to the easy question was a very little out of the way; 
but his answer to the difficult question – how much the refund should be – was exactly 
correct. Herr Wasserkopf is a mathematical genius.
WASSERKOPF: (striking his forehead) So you did put one over me!
THE PRINCIPAL: (rising) I present the results of the examination. Herr Wasserkopf 
has passed with distinction in every subject, and has again sho wn that he is entitled 
to the certificate we awarded him on his graduation. Herr Wasse rkopf, we offer 
our congratulations – accepting a large share of them for ourse lves for having 
taught you so excellently. And now that we have verified your k nowledge and your 
abilities – (he makes an eloquent gesture)  get out before I have you thrown out!
(He rings for the servant. The following speeches are nearly spoken simultaneously.)
THE HISTORY MASTER: So I’m a numskull, am I? Say it again and I’ll show you 
what is what!

=== PAGE 337 ===

 English: Grade 11 330
THE PHYSICS MASTER: I’m a cannibal? What? And you were the one who tied a 
string across the aisle –
THE GEOGRAPHY MASTER: Hypocrite? Nitwit? Ass? Me?
THE MATHEMATICS MASTER: Old stick-in-the-mud?
THE SERVANT: (entering) Yes, sir?
THE PRINCIPAL: (indicating Wasserkopf) Remove that object! (The servant seizes 
Wasserkopf by the collar and the seat of his trousers and rushes him off. The Principal 
turns to the staff and beams.) Thank you, gentlemen, for your magnificent co-operation. 
In the future it will be our proudest boast that in this school a pupil simply cannot fail!
CURTAIN
NOTES
Bourbons: members of the French royal family that ruled France, Spain an d Naples 
at various times
Quantum theory: a theory in physics based on Planck’s radiation law concerned with 
the emission and absorption of energy by finite quanta
Planck: Max Planck (1858-1947), a German theoretical physicist whose d iscovery 
of energy quanta won him the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1918
Einstein: Albert Einstein (1879-1955), a German-born theoretical physici st who 
developed the Theory of Relativity. He was awarded a Nobel Prize in 1921.
Brunswick: the historical English name for the German city of Braunschweig
Barbarossa: Friedrich Barbarossa (1122-1190), also known as Frederick I, w as the 
Holy Roman Emperor as well as the King of Germany during the 12 th century. The 
word Barbarossa literally means ‘Red beard’ in Italian. Barbaro ssa reigned as Holy 
Roman Emperor from 1155 to 1190.
Glossary
apperceptive (adj.): having or showing conscious perception with full awareness
ascribe (v.): to attribute a cause or characteristic to something
by hook or crook (idm.): by any method possible
cannibal (n.): a person who eats the flesh of other human being
concur (v.): be of the same opinion; agree
disquieted (adj.): anxious or worried

=== PAGE 338 ===

English: Grade 11 331
eloquent (adj.): well spoken; expressive; effective
heller (n.): a Hungarian coin of small value
herr: German term of address for a man
hussar (n.): (in the 15th century) a Hungarian light horseman
hypocrite (n.): a person who pretends to have virtues, moral or religious beliefs
incessant (adj.): continuing without pause or interruption
melancholy (adj.): having a feeling of sadness without obvious cause
nitwit (n.): a silly or foolish person
numskull (n): a very stupid or silly person
old-stick-in-the-mud (idm.): a person who avoids new, fun, or exciting activities or 
ideas
rot (n): a process of becoming worse; a decline in standards
 Understanding the text 
Answer the following questions.
a. Why does Wasserkopf demand a refund of his tuition fees from  the school?
b. Why does Wasserkopf consider himself good for nothing?
c. What did the teachers decide to do when Wasserkopf asked for  a refund?
d. Why did Wasserkopf give ridiculous answers? Why did the teac hers accept these 
answers?
e. How does the Mathematics Master describe Wasserkopf’s charac ter?
f. How did the teachers outwit Wasserkopf?
g. What is the final judgment on Waserkopf’s demand of refund? 
 Reference to the context 
a. Read the extract from the play given below and answer the qu estions that follow:
 “It’s possible I’ve changed. What the hell…! Your class record s will show I’ve 
got a right to come here.”
i. Who is the speaker? Who is he speaking to?
ii. Why is the speaker say these words?
iii. Where is the speaker at this moment?
b. Read the extract dialogue given below and answer the questio ns that follow:

=== PAGE 339 ===

 English: Grade 11 332
“THE STAFF: (bowing, heartily) How do you do?
WASSERKOPF: Who the hell are you? Sit down, you loafers! (He grins, 
waiting to be thrown out)
THE PRINCIPAL: How dare you –”
i. What is to be the response to ‘How do you do?’
ii. Is Wasserkopf’s response polite enough to the staff?
iii. How does Wasserkopf rebuke the staff?
iv. What does the principal mean by ‘How dare you -’?
c. Explain the following line of the play:
 “Because I didn’t get my money’s worth, that’s why!”
d. What is the theme of the play?
e. Sketch the character of Wasserkopf.
 Reference beyond the text 
a. The play is a satire on the present day education system. Do  you think that our 
education system does not prepare students for life? Discuss.
b. Our education system focuses on memorisation rather than cre ative thinking. Do 
you think the knowledge imparted by education may not have practical relevance 
in one’s day-to-day life? Who do you blame for this?
c. Most of the students want to learn just for examination rath er than knowledge. 
Do you think that certificate will help them in their future career?